CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 1
CARIBBEANEXAMINATIONSCOUNCIL
Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate
CSEC
®
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
SYLLABUS
Effective for examinations from May/June 2010
Published by the Caribbean Examinations Council
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form, or by any means electronic, photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior
permission of the author or publisher.
Correspondence related to the syllabus should be addressed to:
The Pro-Registrar
Caribbean Examinations Council
Caenwood Centre
37 Arnold Road, Kingston 5, Jamaica, W.I.
Telephone: (876) 630-5200
Facsimile Number: (876) 967-4972
E-mail address: cxcwzo@cxc.org
Website: www.cxc.org
Copyright © 2008, by Caribbean Examinations Council
The Garrison, St Michael BB14038, Barbados
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08
ii
Contents
RATIONALE .............................................................................................................................................. 1
AIMS ...................................................................................................................................................... 2
ORGANIZATION OF THE SYLLABUS .................................................................................................. 2
SUGGESTED TIME-TABLE ALLOCATION.......................................................................................... 2
FORMAT OF THE EXAMINATIONS ..................................................................................................... 3
CERTIFICATION AND DEFINITION OF PROFILE DIMENSIONS.................................................. 4
HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS............................................................................. 5
NOTES TO TEACHERS ........................................................................................................................... 5
REGULATIONS FOR RESIT CANDIDATES......................................................................................... 7
REGULATIONS FOR STUDENTS FROM PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS .............................................. 7
SECTION 1 – FUNDAMENTALS OF HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE ............................................ 8
SECTION 2 – PROBLEM-SOLVING AND PROGRAM DESIGN........................................................ 10
SECTION 3 – PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION ................................................................................... 12
SECTION 4 – APPLICATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS OF INFORMATION AND
 COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY ........................................................................... 13
SECTION 5 – INFORMATION PROCESSING ..................................................................................... 15
SECTION 6 – WORDPROCESSING, PRESENTATION AND WEB PAGE DESIGN ...................... 16
SECTION 7 – SPREADSHEETS............................................................................................................... 19
SECTION 8 – DATABASE MANAGEMENT.......................................................................................... 21
GUIDELINES FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT............................ 23
RECOMMENDED TEXTS........................................................................................................................ 46
GLOSSARY................................................................................................................................................. 47
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08
iii
This document CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 replaces CXC 30/G; T/SYLL 00A issued in 2000.
Revised 2000, 2008, 2013
Please check the website, www.cxc.org for updates on CXC’s syllabuses.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08
Information Technology
Syllabus
◆ RATIONALE
Information Technology has evolved over the past five decades in response to the need for more efficient
techniques to manage the significantly increased volume and sophistication of the knowledge reservoir of
mankind. It merges the study of Computer Science, Telecommunications and Office Automation; involves
the collection, storage, accessing, processing and dissemination of information and impacts on both work
and leisure activities.
In a world characterised by technological innovation and computerized responses to situations in the work
place and in the wider society, all citizens will need to have practical exposure to the techniques of
Information Technology in order to bridge the widening gap between Caribbean nations and the developed
countries and provide our citizens with the best chances for survival and growth in this new age.
A structured programme in Information Technology develops computer-related skills and encourages the
development of analytical and design skills which are applicable in all areas of the curriculum. This unique
feature warrants the inclusion of Information Technology in the secondary school curriculum.
This syllabus is designed to provide a coherent view of the significance of information in a socio-economic
context. Emphasis is placed on application of knowledge and the use of the computer. This approach has
been adopted in recognition of the impact that changes in the availability of information can have on the
educational process. The focus is on getting students to develop skills for life in an increasingly
technological world, rather than on students absorbing a myriad of seemingly unrelated facts which may
have only short term relevance.
The syllabus aims to provide the kind of practical experience which includes an element of discovery, and
fosters self-confidence, together with the practical skills that will prepare students to meet the region’s need
for greatly increased productivity and cost effective procedures.
The Information Technology syllabus is based on objectives, skills and content which will cultivate the attributes of the Ideal
Caribbean Person as articulated by CARICOM. That is, a Caribbean person who demonstrates multiple literacies, as well as
independent and critical thinking. The individual questions the beliefs and practices of the past and brings this to bear on the
innovative application of science and technology to problem solving. Such a person will inevitably demonstrate a high level of
self-confidence and self-esteem, a positive work ethic, and display and nurture creative imagination in the economic and
entrepreneurial spheres and other areas of life. Also, in keeping with the UNESCO Pillars of Learning, this course of study will
contribute to the development of a person who will learn to be, learn to know, learn to do, learn to live together, and learn to
transform oneself and society.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 1
◆ AIMS
The syllabus aims to:
1. prepare students to function effectively in a dynamic technological era;
2. promote the development of computer-related skills for immediate application to other curricular
areas;
3. provide a foundation for post-secondary education;
4. facilitate the development and application of problem-solving skills in students.
◆ ORGANIZATION OF THE SYLLABUS
The syllabus is organised under eight main sections.
1. Fundamentals of Hardware and Software
2. Problem-Solving and Program Design
3. Program Implementation
4. Applications and Implications of Information and Communications Technology
5. Information Processing
6. Wordprocessing, Presentation and Web Page Design
7. Spreadsheets
8. Database Management
◆ SUGGESTED TIME-TABLE ALLOCATION
It is estimated that the syllabus can be covered in approximately 160 hours or 4 periods per week during the
fourth and fifth years in the secondary school. A suggested time allocation (in hours) is shown below for
each section. The laboratory hours indicated are calculated on a per student basis.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 2
1.
Section
Fundamentals of Hardware and
Class
18
Lab
4
Field
2
Total
23
Software
2. Problem-Solving and Program Design 7 15 - 22
3. Program Implementation 15 20 - 35
4. Applications and Implications
of Information and Communications
Technology
11 - 2 13
5. Information Processing 12 - - 12
6. Wordprocessing, Presentation
and Web Page Design
5 15 - 20
7. Spreadsheets 5 10 - 15
8. Database Management 5 13 - 18
Allied Subjects
Although no subjects are being specified as either prerequisites or co-requisites to Information Technology,
it is expected that students would have pursued a course in Mathematics up to Grade 9 (Form 3).
◆ FORMAT OF THE EXAMINATIONS
Paper 01 Sixty multiple choice items drawn from all areas of the syllabus.
(1 hour 30 minutes)
Paper 02 Twelve compulsory structured questions drawn from all areas of the syllabus, divided
(2 hours 15 minutes) into three sections. Section 1 is worth 60 marks and consists of six short answer
questions. Section 2 is worth 15 marks and consists of two structured questions.
Section 3 is worth 45 marks and consists of four structured questions.
School Based Assessment
Paper 03 The SBA component will comprise a practical project testing: Section 2, Problem-Solving and
Program Design; Section 3, Program Implementation; Section 6, Wordprocessing; Section 7,
Spreadsheets and Section 8, Database Management.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 3
The Project will carry 90 marks which will account for 30% of the final grade. This 90
marks will be distributed as follows: 20 for Wordprocessing; 20 for Spreadsheets; 20 for
Database Management and 30 Problem-Solving and Programming. The project will be
marked by the teacher in accordance with CXC guidelines and the marks should be
submitted to CXC. The assignment should be administered as specified in the instructions
contained in the Guidelines to the Conduct of the SBA, on pages 23 – 45.
N.B. A student doing more than one subject in the Business cognate group may submit one
SBA project under a theme that covers the group.
◆ CERTIFICATION AND DEFINITION OF PROFILE DIMENSIONS
The subject will be examined for certification at the General Proficiency.
In addition to an overall grade, there will be a profile report that reflects the performance of each candidate under the
following headings.
Profile Dimensions
Theory The ability to apply fundamental concepts and skills to Information Technology.
Productivity Tools The ability to apply standard features in the following areas:
(i) word processor in the preparation of documents, as well as the candidate’s
ability to use presentation and web page design applications;
(ii) spreadsheet programme in solving problems and presenting data; and
(iii) database management programme in storing and retrieving data.
Problem-Solving and
Programming
The ability to use analytical skills in the development of algorithms, expressed as flowcharts
or pseudocode, that can then be implemented as computer programs.
MARK AND WEIGHT ALLOCATION FOR PROFILE DIMENSIONS
Paper/Profiles Theory
Productivity
Tools
Problem-Solving
an d
Programming
Paper
Total
% Weighting
of Papers
Paper 01 30 15 15 60 20
Paper 02 60 15 45 120 50
Paper 03 - 60 30 90 30
Profile Totals 90 90 90 270
% Weighting Profiles 33.33 33.33 33.33 100
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 4
◆ HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS
For Schools:
1. It is the responsibility of schools presenting candidates for the examinations to ensure that the
required hardware and software are in place to achieve the syllabus objectives.
2. PASCAL is recommended for the programming units.
3. Students should have access to a PASCAL compiler and productivity software offering the advanced features
required by the syllabus. From the list provided below, teachers may select appropriate software for
the Wordprocessing, Spreadsheets, Database Management, Presentation and Web Page Design
components of the syllabus.
Recommended Software
Wordprocessing Spreadsheets Database Management Presentation Web Page
Design
1. Microsoft
Word
2. WordPerfect
1. Lotus 1-2-3
2. Microsoft
Excel
1. Microsoft Access
2. Filemaker/Filemaker
Pro
1. PowerPoint
2. Freelance
1. Frontpage
2. MS Word
3. Microsoft
Works
4. Claris Works
5. Microsoft
PowerPoint
3. Microsoft
Works
4. Claris Works
5. Quattro Pro
3. Paradox
◆ NOTES TO TEACHERS
1. Students should be aware of the input/process/storage/output cycle as it pertains to hardware and
software components in Section 1.
2. Section 2 should be taught before Section 3. Students should learn how to write algorithms, before they are
introduced to coding in a programming language.
3. In Section 2, the focus should be on the development of problem solutions in the form of algorithms
written in pseudocode/flowchart. The problem-solving skills acquired in this section serves as a
foundation for programming in Section 3.
4. In Section 3, students are required to translate the algorithms developed in Section 2 into computer programs,
using the recommended programming language (PASCAL). Use simple problems, for example, finding the
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 5
average of a set of integers, or calculating tax payable, to illustrate how to develop simple programs.
5. In Section 3, laboratory sessions should be used to:
a. familiarize the student with the features of the recommended compiler;
b. identify and correct syntax errors;
c. identify and correct logic errors;
d. execute program and display results; and
e. introduce students to and encourage them to use the debugging tool.
It is recommended that the students be required to write the programs on paper, before they get on the computer.
That is, the act of program coding should take place before they actually get on the computer. This allows
for more efficient utilization of computer time.
6. In Section 4, the aim is to familiarize the students with basic terms and concepts associated with computer
networks and the Internet. A detailed treatment of the concepts is NOT required. Where possible, it would be
helpful if teachers invite someone with expertise in Internet Technology to address the class and explain some of
the concepts.
7. While it is expected that students would gain skills in the use of productivity tools through practice
on specific packages, teachers should ensure that students have an appreciation of the generic
operations of each of the productivity tools so that skills are transferable to other packages.
8. Teachers should organize field trips to allow students to see a variety of hardware used in diverse
application areas.
9. Although not a requirement of the course, it may be useful to apprise students of the history of
computers.
10. Teachers should encourage students to read computer magazines and, if possible, the school should
subscribe to several of these.
11. A glossary has been provided to facilitate a uniform interpretation of the terminology used in the
syllabus. Teachers are advised to make use of this glossary and also the list of recommended texts.
However, the reading list provided is not exhaustive and additional references should be consulted.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 6
◆ REGULATIONS FOR RESIT CANDIDATES
1. Resit candidates must complete all the components of the examination.
2. Candidates who earned at least 50 percent of the MODERATED scores for the SBA component at
the previous sitting may elect not to repeat this component provided they rewrite the examination in the
subsequent year.
3. SBA scores can be transferred once only, that is to the examination immediately following that for
which the SBA scores were obtained.
4. Resit candidates may be entered through the Local Registrar and should on registration indicate
that they are resit candidates and give their registration number from the previous year.
5. Candidates who obtained less than 50% of the Moderated marks for the SBA component must
repeat the component at any subsequent year and must fulfil the requirements for that year.
Candidates may choose to do a new project or improve on the project done in the previous year.
6. Candidates repeating the SBA component must be entered through a school or other approved
educational institution.
◆ REGULATIONS FOR STUDENTS FROM PRIVATE
INSTITUTIONS
1. Candidates entered for the examination through private institutions recognized by the Council will be required to
complete all the requirements of the syllabus.
2. Although the project is assessed in components in class, candidates are to be given the entire project. As
candidates work on individual components in class they must be monitored by tutors in the institution and given
feedback before the final assessment of that component. Tutors must also monitor candidates’ project to
determine the veracity of work submitted. Tutors should not accept projects which were not monitored during
development. The marks recorded in the four components will be collated to form the final SBA mark for
submission by April 30, in the year of the examination.
3. Marks must be submitted to the Caribbean Examinations Council on the School-Based Assessment forms
provided online. The forms should be submitted electronically via the SBA data capture module on the Online
Registration System (ORS) on the Council’s website www.cxc.org Candidates who do not fulfil the requirements
for the School-Based Assessment will be reported as “ungraded”.
4. Candidates as well as tutors must retain a copy of the completed component as part of their portfolio.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 7
◆ SECTION 1: FUNDAMENTALS OF HARDWARE AND
SOFTWARE
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. appreciate the fundamental hardware and software terminologies and concepts;
2. develop expertise in the operation and use of microcomputer-based systems.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. describe a general-purpose computer system; Major functions of systems: input, processing,
output, storage.
2. explain the functions of the major hardware
components of a computer system;
Central Processing Unit (CPU): control unit and
ALU; main memory/immediate access storage,
secondary storage, input/output devices.
3. outline the functions and uses of primary
storage devices;
Bistable devices, PROM, EPROM, RAM, ROM.
4. manipulate units of storage; Bit, byte, kilobyte, megabyte, gigabyte, terabyte, word, word
size.
5. compare the types of secondary storage media
with respect to portability, speed and capacity;
Magnetic tape, floppy disk, hard disk (fixed head, moving
head, external), optical disks (CD, DVD), flash drive,
flash memory cards.
6. use terms associated with storage devices; Read/write head, sectors, tracks, buffers, cylinders,
access time, sequential access, direct access; device
interfaces such as: SCSI, IDE, SATA.
7. explain the uses of various input devices and
media;
Optical mark reader (OMR), character readers
(OCR, MICR), mouse, joystick, bar code reader,
document scanner, light-pen, touch terminals, voice
response unit, pads and tablets, point of sale (POS),
keyboard, digital camera, biometric systems, sensors,
remote control, sound capture, pointing devices, webcam.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 8
FUNDAMENTALS OF HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
8. state the types and functions of output devices; Visual display unit: resolution, types, sizes. Printers:
impact and non-impact, types: (character, line, page, laser,
inkjet, dot matrix). Characteristics: (speed, quality, storage
capacity); plotters; audio output devices (for example,
speakers, head-phones, earphones); microfilm. Also terms
such as hard copy, soft copy, human readable and
machine–readable.
9. describe how data are stored and
manipulated within the computer;
Binary, octal and hexadecimal number systems; binary
addition and subtraction. Integers (positive and
negative): sign and magnitude, BCD, two’s
complement; representation of characters, ASCII.
10. interpret the hardware specifications of a
computer system;
CPU type and speed; memory: capacity, type, word size,
speed. Hard drive: capacity, speed; fire wire, expansion
slots, ports.
11. distinguish between systems programs and
application programs;
Systems software: operating systems, translators, utilities:
Application software: general purpose, special purpose,
custom written. Customization, integrated software.
12. explain the functions of an operating system; File management, memory management, security, device
management, input/output management, user interface,
process management.
13. distinguish among multitasking, multiprocessing
and multiprogramming;
Basic treatment of these terms. (See glossary).
14. explain the different types of processing modes; Batch processing, real-time, on-line, time-sharing.
15. distinguish between types of user interface. Software interface: Command driven, graphical user
interface (GUI) (menu driven, pull-down and pop-up
menus, icons). Hardware interface: touch screens, nonvisual interface, sensors, and Braille keyboards.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 9
◆SECTION 2: PROBLEM-SOLVING AND PROGRAM DESIGN
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
On completion of this Section, students should have an understanding of the fundamental principles and
practices of problem-solving on the computer.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. outline the steps in problem-solving; Definition of the problem; propose and evaluate solutions;
determination of the most efficient solution; develop and represent
algorithm; test and validate the solution.
2. decompose a simple problem into its
significant parts;
The components are: input; process; storage; output.
3. distinguish between variables and constants; Variables as an area of storage whose value can change during
processing; the value of a constant never changes.
4. use appropriate data types; Integers, floating point (real), characters, literals.
5. explain the concept of algorithms; Definition of algorithms; Characteristics: finite number of steps,
precise, unambiguous, flow of control from one process to another,
terminate.
6. identify ways of representing algorithms; Representation of algorithms as Pseudocode or Flowcharts; Use of
flowchart symbols: input/output, process, decision, directional
arrows. Pseudocode - Use of: Read, Input, Store Write,
Output, Display, If-then; If-then-else; For
loop; while loop; (questions which require nested conditionals or
nested loops will not be asked).
Truth Tables
Use of relational operators: <, >, =, <=, > =, < >. Logical
operators: AND, OR, NOT.
Arithmetic operators: +‚ –‚ *, /.
Simple problems including; average, maximum.
7. develop algorithms to solve simple
problems;
Use of problem-solving techniques outlined in Specific Objective 1
to the solution of simple problems.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 10
PROBLEM-SOLVING AND PROGRAM DESIGN (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
8. test algorithms for correctness; Construction and use of trace tables to determine result. Trace
table consists of variable names (identifiers) as column headings
and values in the cells, one row for each pass.
9. use the top-down design approach to
problem solving.
Application of stepwise refinement to problems with two or more
tasks.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 11
◆ SECTION 3: PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
On completion of this Section, students should have an understanding of how to convert algorithms to programs
using structured programming techniques.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. distinguish between low-level and highlevel programming languages;
Low-level language (Machine or Assembly Language); High- level
language (Pascal, C).
2. distinguish among the different
generations of programming languages;
Characterisation of first through to fifth generation languages.
3. list the sequence of steps associated with
implementing a program;
Create source code, compile, linking, executing, maintain
program.
4. explain commonly used terms and
concepts in programming;
Testing, debugging, syntax errors, logic errors, run-time errors, dry
run, test data.
5. declare elementary data types; Integers, real numbers, characters.
6. declare variables and constants; Use of meaningful variable names and constants; assign initial
values.
7. manipulate data; Reading from and writing to variables, arithmetic operations.
8. use control structures; Conditional branching: if-then, if-then-else, Loops: while, repeat,
for.
9. manipulate data in a list; Declare 1-dimensional arrays; reading from and writing to arrays;
traversing arrays; linear search.
10. perform checks and tests on
programs to verify correctness;
Testing and debugging techniques.
11. write documented programs. Importance of documentation; features of internal
documentation (use of mnemonic names, use of
comments, indentation, effective use of white spaces);
external documentation (user manuals).
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 12
◆ SECTION 4: APPLICATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS OF
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS
TECHNOLOGY
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should develop an awareness of:
1. the use of the computer and the implications of that use;
2. trends in Internet and Communications Technology;
3. careers in the field of Information Technology.
A: INTERNET AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. use terms associated with data
communications and networks;
Definitions of data communication and network; types of
networks: (local area network, wide area network, metropolitan
area network), types of transmission media: cable/wired media
(coaxial, fibre-optic, twisted pair), wireless media (satellite,
microwave, infra-red), wireless network technology: (Bluetooth,
Wi-Fi), hotspot, modem, bandwidth (broadband, narrowband,
voiceband), communication modes: (simplex, duplex, half
duplex), point-to-point, and broadcast.
2. distinguish among Internet, intranet and
extranet;
Refer to glossary.
3. explain concepts associated with the Internet; Including Electronic mail (e-mail), newsgroups, Internet Relay
Chat (IRC), Telnet, File Transfer Protocol (FTP),
upload, download, World Wide Web (WWW), web browser,
HTTP, Hypertext Markup Language (HTML/XHTML),
web page, website, blogging, webserver, URL, e-commerce, elearning, HTTP, pod-casting, bulletin board, VoIP.
4. describe measures to secure data and
maintain data integrity;
Software Restrictions: passwords, encryption, virus protection,
firewall; physical access restrictions: biometric systems, guards,
locks; fire/water proof cabinets; archiving; backup and recovery
procedures; propriety data and software.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 13
APPLICATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS
TECHNOLOGY (cont’d)
B: APPLICATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
5. outline ways by which information can be
misused;
Violation of privacy, propaganda, software piracy, computer
fraud, electronic eavesdropping, industrial espionage,
surveillance, storage of inaccurate information, identity theft,
credit card fraud.
6. describe appropriate hardware and
software to meet the particular needs of
a given application;
Projects to determine the relevant hardware and software (open
source vs. proprietary) used in areas including business, industry,
science and technology, education, law enforcement, recreation,
music, gaming.
7. describe current and emerging
technological trends;
Expert systems, robots, CADD, CAE, CAM, telemarketing,
teleconferencing.
8. assess the impact of Information
Technology on job skills and careers;
Computer skills used by office employees, teachers,
engineers, medical personnel, musicians, mass media
personnel, law enforcement personnel, movie industry;
loss of jobs; retraining; telecommuting.
9. describe the roles of various personnel in
computer-related professions.
The functions of individuals in computer-related fields:
programmers, systems analysts and designers, IT managers,
systems programmers, database administrators, network
administrators, IT managers, file librarians, computer
technicians, computer engineers, software engineers, software
testers, webmaster, web-developer, software trainer, multi-media
artists.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 14
◆ SECTION 5: INFORMATION PROCESSING
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
On completion of this Section, students should develop an understanding of the principles, organization
and operation of Information Processing Systems.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. distinguish between data and information; Data as raw unprocessed facts; information as processed
data.
2. explain the characteristics and
functions of Information Processing;
Forms of Information Processing: automation, process
control, commercial, industrial, and scientific data
processing; information retrieval and management.
3. identify the sources of data in specified
application areas;
Source document, turnaround document, machine and
human readable document.
4. describe methods of validation and
verification of data;
Difference between validation and verification. Methods:
range check, reasonableness checks, data type checks,
inconsistency checks.
5. identify appropriate verification and
validation checks given a particular
scenario;
Such as double entry to identify and correct
typographical/transposition errors.
6. describe various methods of file
organization and access;
Sequential field ordering; random, index-sequential; directaccess, sequential-access.
7. select appropriate file organization for
particular application.
Associate an appropriate file structure and access method to a
specific application. For example, a payroll file would be
organised sequentially with sequential access.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 15
◆ SECTION 6: WORDPROCESSING, PRESENTATION AND
WEB PAGE DESIGN
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
On completion of this Section, students should have hands-on experience in the use of Wordprocessing,
Presentation and Web Page Design packages in the development of computer-generated documents and be able to
express their aptitude and creativity in design.
A: WORDPROCESSING
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. select appropriate editing features in the
preparation of a document;
Deleting and inserting characters, words, lines, sentences,
paragraphs. Type-over mode. Selecting blocks of text. Copying
and moving sections of text.
2. describe commonly available features; Page numbers, page breaks, text alignment, wordwrap,
margins, tabs, page length, default settings, font size.
3. select appropriate formatting features for the
preparation of a document;
Margins, tab stops, line spacing, page breaks, page
numbers, left and right justification, centre line,
underline, highlight, uppercase, bold, and italic.
4. use headers, footers, footnotes and
endnotes appropriately;
5. combine documents;
6. perform block operations;
7. use columns and tables appropriately;
8. apply appropriate character formatting
features;
Underline, bold, italics, font types and sizes, superscript
and subscript.
9. use search and replace functions appropriately;
10. use mail-merge facilities; Creation of primary documents and data files in mail merge
application; Field names.
11. use spell-check;
12. import documents; Text files, graphics, tables including options such as automatic
save and backup copy, password protection, track changes.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 16
WORDPROCESSING, PRESENTATION AND WEB PAGE DESIGN (cont’d)
B: PRESENTATION
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
13. explain the uses of presentation software; For example, to enhance public speaking; to deliver lectures; to
present project reports; to effectively present sales or marketing
ideas.
14. explain the concepts of wizards, templates
and slides;
15. choose appropriate slide layout; Slide layout must relate to the type of information being
presented.
16. apply design templates to slides; Choosing from a list of presentation designs.
17. use formatting features effectively to enhance
presentation;
Changing background colour, font size and other attributes,
such as font colour and bullets.
18. create slide headers and footers;
19. create and use speaker notes;
Use of the slide master to personalize the slides.
20. apply various types of animation effects to
slides;
Flying, drive-in, camera effects; flash-once, typewriter; laser,
reverse-texts, drop-in effects. Custom animation; timing and
sound effects.
21. insert graphics and moving pictures into a
slide;
22. manipulate multiple slides; Insertion and deletion of slides; use of the slide sorter.
23. present a slide show. Use of slide show tools such as slide navigator, pointer options,
screen attributes.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 17
WORDPROCESSING, PRESENTATION AND WEB PAGE DESIGN (cont’d)
C: WEB PAGE DESIGN
This section provides students with hands-on experience in the use of web design software to create and maintain simple
websites.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
24. plan the website; Reasons for the website; the intended audience; number of web
pages desired; content of each page; layout of the web pages.
25. create a simple web page; Choosing an appropriate design for a page; inserting and
deleting text and graphics; wrap text with image; create
thumbnail image, index page, home page, hyperlink.
26. create hyperlinks; Linking to another web page; link to a location within the web
page; link to an email address; link to user-created files.
27. test the website; Use of a web browser; verify that all the hyperlinks work
correctly; use a test audience.
28. publish and maintain a website. Registering domain names; locate hosting company; the use of
the file transfer protocol (FTP) for uploading files.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 18
◆ SECTION 7: SPREADSHEETS
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
On completion of this Section, students should develop expertise in the use of a spreadsheet package in the
development of computer applications.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. explain the purpose of a spreadsheet; Definition of spreadsheet: a spreadsheet is a table consisting of
cells (rows, column locations) that hold accounting or financial
data and simulates the traditional physical spreadsheet; it
captures displays and manipulates data.
2. use appropriate terminology and notions
commonly associated with spreadsheets;
Row, column, cell, cell address, label, value, formula, function,
worksheet, template, range, title, window, record.
3. select basic pre-defined systems functions; Including sum, average, date, maximum, minimum, count, if,
vlookup, rank.
4. create advanced arithmetic formulae; Formulae involving addition, subtraction; multiplication;
division; powers; square roots, the use of brackets.
5. explain the use of common features of
spreadsheet software;
Row/column title locking, relative addressing, absolute
addressing.
6. invoke row and column title locking; Horizontal, vertical, both.
7. replicate (copy) formulae into other cells; Relative versus absolute addressing.
8. manipulate data on a spreadsheet; Effects of move, copy, delete operations on formulae.
9. manipulate columns and rows; Insert and delete columns and rows.
10. format a spreadsheet; Numeric data formatting, text formatting, alignment,
borders.
11. sort a spreadsheet; Primary field, secondary field, ascending vs. descending
order.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 19
SPREADSHEETS (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able:
12. find a record matching a given criterion; Simple criterion, complex criterion, record - find
command.
13. perform charting operations; Bar charts, line graphs, pie charts, graph titles, labels on
axes.
14. select appropriate graphical representation
of data;
15. manipulate multiple worksheets; Use of two or more worksheets to solve problems involving some
or all of the functions and operations listed above.
16. import files. Graphics, tables.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 20
◆ SECTION 8: DATABASE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
On completion of this Section, students should develop expertise in the design of a database management
system in the development of computer applications.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. explain the concept of a database; Definition of database: repository of information; collection of
tables that are related to each other.
2. use terminology commonly associated with
a database;
Database terminology: table (relation), entity, tuple, attribute,
primary key, secondary key, composite key, candidate key,
alternate key, foreign key.
3. distinguish among terminology associated
with files and databases;
Row (tuple, record), column (attribute, field), key.
Data types: alphanumeric; numeric; data; logical.
4. outline the advantages and limitations of
databases;
Comparison with files with regards to: Speed; Ad hoc queries;
standardization; present multiple views of the same data.
5. create a database; Table structure with at least three data types and
populate with at least twenty-five records. Use of wizard
is prohibited.
6. modify a table structure; Adding new fields, deleting fields, changing field definitions.
7. sort a database; Arranging data in numeric, alphabetic; or alphanumeric
format. Report generating facilities of the database
package, including use of sorting, grouping statistical and
summary features, for example, count, sum and average.
8. establish relationships; Use of joins, merge tables/files.
9. query a database using multiple search
conditions;
Using more than one criterion; use of select, calculated fields.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 21
DATABASE MANAGEMENT (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
10. determine the results of a search on a
database given multiple conditions;
Two or more fields involving the use of relational and
logical operators.
11. generate reports to the screen, printer
and files.
Report generating facilities of the database package, including
use of sorting, grouping, statistical and summary features, for
example, count, sum and average.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 22
◆ GUIDELINES FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE SCHOOL BASED
ASSESSMENT
The guidelines for conducting the SBA which consists of a practical project set by the teacher are shown below.
1. AIM
To provide students with the opportunity to demonstrate their problem solving and programming
skills as well as their ability to use productivity tools effectively in:
(i) entering, manipulating and presenting text data;
(ii) simulating a worksheet;
(iii) entering data, performing simple analysis on data and presenting data using a database
management tool.
2. ASSIGNMENT
The School Based Assessment consists of one practical project consisting of four related
components, prepared and marked by the teacher in accordance with CXC guidelines.
The components will test Problem Solving and Programming as well as the application of processes
involved in the use of Database Management, Spreadsheets and Wordprocessing. The four
components will therefore cover the Specific Objectives in Sections 2, 3, 6, 7 and 8.
3. ROLE OF THE TEACHER
The role of teacher is to:
(i) assign the project for the School Based Assessment.
(ii) provide guidance throughout the life of the projects. The teacher should work with
candidates to develop a project management chart with definite time lines for achieving clearly
identified objectives, from project inception to project completion.
(iii) guide the candidate through the SBA by helping to clarify the problem or by discussing
possible approaches to solving the problem. Teachers, while giving guidance, should guard against
providing a complete solution to the problem for the candidate or prescribing a specific format
that should be followed.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 23
(iv) assess each student’s skills in problem solving and algorithm development using flowcharts
or pseudocode, coding an algorithm in Pascal and the effective use of productivity tools to
perform prescribed activities. The development of the project is a continuous exercise that
occurs during scheduled class hours as well as outside class times. At a time to be
determined by the teacher the relevant component will be assessed and the marks
recorded. Hardcopies of the completed documents should be kept by both the teacher and student.
The teacher should use the mark scheme provided by CXC and include any comments
pertinent to the conduct of the assessment.
(v) guide the candidate through the SBA by helping to clarify the problem or by discussing
possible formats.
(vi) ensure that students are allowed sufficient access to equipment to allow successful
completion of their projects.
4. ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
The following is the mark scheme for assessing SBA assignments. Teachers must clearly
indicate the breakdown of the marks allocated for each question on the candidates’ SBA paper.
(i) Wordprocessing - 20 marks
Processes Key Skills Mark
Allocation
The effectiveness with which the
student uses formatting facilities
to create and enhance the
document.
• Formatting for presentation
- justification
- single and double line spacing
- paragraph styling (indent, hanging,
block)
• Formatting for emphasis
- bold
- italics
- borders and shading to highlight and
give emphasis
- font and point size
• Other features
- use of spell checker/search and
replace/grammar check
- search and replace
2
2
1
(5)
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 24
Processes Key Skills Mark
Allocation
The effectiveness with which
students use formatting facilities
to present information.
• Page Layout
- set margins
- change page orientations
- change paper size
- text orientation
• Headers/footers/endnotes
• Tables
2
1
2
(5)
The effectiveness with which
students use facilities to create
flyers or brochures.
• Multiple page/book fold/columns
• Use of graphics
• Clarity of itemization
- insert/delete (word, sentence,
paragraph document)
- block operations - move/copy/cut and
paste
2
1
1
1
(5)
The effectiveness with which • Defining appropriate fields in the document 1
students use facilities to perform • Creating primary document 1
mail merge. • Creating secondary document appropriately 1
• Performing the mail merge 2
(5)
(ii) Spreadsheets – 20 marks
Processes Key Skills Mark
Allocation
The effectiveness with which
students use pre-defined
systems functions to form
arithmetic, logical and relation
expressions.
• Demonstrating awareness of the existence of
appropriate formulae
• Use of appropriate formulae to solve numeric
problems
• Replicating formulae
• Use of range names, relative and absolute
addressing formats
1
2
1
2
(6)
The effectiveness with which
students manipulate the
spreadsheet.
• Copying data
• Moving data
• Use of formatting features to allow clarity of
display
• Inserting page breaks appropriately
• Deleting and inserting rows such that
formulae remain unaffected
2
(2)
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 25
Processes Key Skills Mark
Allocation
The effectiveness with which
students use the search and
sorting facilities.
• Setting up primary and secondary key fields 1
(1)
The effectiveness with which
students perform graphic
operations to present
information.
• Creating appropriate charts to represent data
- bar, pie, line, from spreadsheet data
• Labelling charts appropriately
• Comparing different series of data on a single
bar chart or line graph
3
1
1
(5)
The effectiveness with which
students use spreadsheets to
solve specific problems.
• Conceptualizing a solution using the
spreadsheet
- select appropriate column and row labels
- layout spreadsheet to permit easy
additions and deletions
- use constants in cells, instead of placing
values directly in formula
• Organizing spreadsheet so that data can easily
be interpreted
• Extracting data to allow summary information
1
1
1
1
2
(6)
(iii) Database Management – 20 marks
Processes Key Skills Mark Allocation
The effectiveness with which students use
facilities in creating and modifying database.
• Defining fields and selecting
appropriate data types to
create tables
• Identifying appropriate
primary keys
• Adding/deleting/sorting/
modifying records or tuples
• Deleting fields and changing
field definitions
3
1
2
1
(7)
The effectiveness with which students use
the query facility.
• Searching database
- use three tables, two
tables one table in queries
to generate new tables
- use multiple conditions
• Producing calculated fields
3
2
2
(7)
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 26
Processes Key Skills Mark Allocation
The effectiveness with which student use
report generating facilities.
• Generating report on
specified fields
• Grouping on fields
• Sorting on fields
• Using summary features, for
example, count and sum
2
1
1
2
(6)
(iv) Problem Solving and Programming – 30 marks
Algorithm Development – 10 marks
Processes Key Skills Mark Allocation
Problem statement that defines the
problem.
• Problem is clearly defined 1
(1)
Representing the solution in flowchart or
pseudocode.
• Start of solution
• Definition of variables
- identify variables
- initialize variables
• Processing
- request for data
- storing data
- appropriate and logical
use of control structures:
selection statements;
looping constructs
- output results
• End of solution
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
(9)
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 27
Trace Table Development – 5 marks
Processes Key Skills Mark Allocation
Constructing the trace table. • ALL variables correctly
identified and used
• Appropriate test data
• Data set complete
- data set test ALL areas for
robustness
- [data set test SOME areas]
• Change in values correctly
demonstrated
1
1
2
[1]
1
(5)
Programme Working to Specification – 15 marks
Processes Key Skills Mark Allocation
The effectiveness with which the program
achieved the objective.
• Program compiled (1)
• Output (2)
- output is correct for ALL
values in teacher’s data set
[Output is correct for
SOME values in the
teacher’s data set]
1
2
[1]
(3)
The effectiveness with which the language
features are used to achieve a working
solution.
• Appropriate use of features of
the language (2)
- appropriate choice of data
types for ALL variables
[appropriate choice of data
types for SOME variables]
• Appropriate use of control
structures (7)
- appropriate initialization
of variables
- appropriate use of
sequence
- appropriate use of if then
else construct
[inefficient use of if then
construct]
2
[1]
1
1
2
[1]
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 28
Processes Key Skills Mark Allocation
The effectiveness with which the language
features are used to achieve a working
solution. (cont’d)
- appropriate use of looping
construct to manipulate
arrays and perform other
tasks
[inefficient or inappropriate
use of loop construct]
3
[1]
(9)
The effectiveness with which the language
features are used to achieve clarity.
• Clarity of program (3)
- program documentation
through variable names;
author of program; date
created; simple statement
of task program solves
- readability (correctly
indented; logical flow of
control; easy to follow;)
- user-friendly.
1
1
1
(3)
5. REQUIREMENTS OF SBA PROJECT DOCUMENTATION
Problem-solving and Program Implementation Component
Requirements Guidelines
Cover sheet The information supplied here is essential since it is used to
associate the submission with a particular candidate.
Table of contents Provides easy reference when evaluating the project.
Problem definition This section provides a clear statement of the problem.
Students are also expected to draw flowcharts.
Program listing and output This section is essential for assessing whether the component
submitted is correct and complete. In addition, this section is
used to evaluate the internal documentation. Candidates must
demonstrate that they can select the appropriate features of the
language to obtain the solution to the problem.
Test data (if applicable) In situations where output is relevant, candidates are required
to supply the test data that produced the output. This
information would be necessary to determine whether the tasks
have been performed correctly.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 29
6. PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING AND SUBMITTING SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT
(i) Teachers are required to record the mark awarded to each candidate under the appropriate
profile dimension on the mark sheet provided by CXC. The completed mark sheets should
be submitted to CXC no later than April 30 of the year of the examination.
Note: The school is advised to keep a copy of the project for each candidate as well as
copies of the mark sheets.
(ii) Teachers will be required to submit to CXC copies of the projects of a sample of candidates as
indicated by CXC. This sample will be re-marked by CXC for moderation purposes.
Note: The SBA Data Capture Module of the Online Registration System (ORS) must be
used for the submission of ALL SBA marks.
7. MODERATION OF SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT
The candidate’s performance on the project will be moderated. The standard and range of marks
awarded by the teacher will be adjusted where appropriate. However, the rank order assigned by
the teacher will be adjusted only in special circumstances and then only after consideration of the
data provided by the sample of marked projects submitted by the teacher and re-marked by CXC.
8. TYPES OF PROJECTS
Teachers should develop assignments that expose the candidates to realistic applications which involve, but are
not limited to the following areas:
(i) business (for example, storing and managing employee, customer and sales records,
marketing);
(ii) banking (for example, creation of different types of accounts, loans, interest, payments on
loans, fixed deposits, investments);
(iii) education (for example, enrolment in schools, academic record keeping);
(iv) entertainment (for example, analysis of data on distribution and sales of movies, music,
electronic games);
(v) environment (for example, records of storms and hurricanes over specific periods and in
named territories, calculation of cost of damage to infrastructure, housing, livestock,
farms);
(vi) law enforcement (collection and management of crime statistics collection and analysis of
data on offenders, cost of maintaining prison populations);
(vii) medicine (for example, managing patient records collection and analysis of data on diseases
over a period of time and in various locations);
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 30
(viii) monitoring (for example, analysis of data on accidents at intersections, counting and
categorizing visitor arrivals in Caribbean territories);
(ix) sports (for example, collection and processing of data on athletes sport meetings).
Wordprocessing
This assignment should consist of the formatting, importing and/or documentation of results to be
included in no more than two word processed documents. One document must be a letter for
mass mailing. The other may be chosen from but not limited to reports, faxes, simple brochures,
flyers and newspaper articles. Note that Presentation and Web Page Design should not be included
in the SBA project. Candidates’ proficiency in these topics would be assessed in Paper 01 and
Paper 02.
Spreadsheet
This assignment should be limited to:
(i) a maximum of THREE major tasks consisting of no more than THREE requirements;
(ii) the creation of no more than TWO charts.
Database Management
The tasks in this assignment should be limited to no more than:
(i) THREE tables or files;
(ii) FOUR queries;
(iii) TWO calculations within queries;
(iv) ONE report, with grouping and sorting involving TWO or THREE tables.
9. SCOPE AND SIZE
The project should be the size and complexity for a candidate to satisfactorily complete during the
second year of the two-year course.
The WP, SS and DB sections of the project should each have approximately the same number of
tasks and degree of complexity such that each project requires the same amount of preparation.
The project should encompass some advanced processes in Sections 6, 7 and 8. Problem-solving
and Program Implementation should be based on the project and not attempted in isolation. It
must, therefore, be an actual implementation of some aspect of the project.
Teachers are encouraged to design their School Based Assessment at the commencement of the
academic year. This would allow for the completion of sections of the project as topics are
addressed. It is suggested that the Problem-Solving component be attempted when the teacher has
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 31
completed Section 2 of the syllabus, and the Program Implementation component at the
completion of Section 3.
10. EQUIPMENT
The equipment should include an IBM-compatible computer with software that is capable of
integration among Wordprocessing, spreadsheet and database management applications. Software
must also include a Pascal compiler. CXC stipulates the use of the programming language Pascal
for program implementation. CXC will not be responsible for partial assignments submitted due
to software compatibility and/or integration problems.
11. PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING AND SUBMITTING SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT
(i) Teachers are required to record the mark awarded to each candidate under the appropriate
profile dimension on the mark sheet provided by CXC. The completed mark sheets should
be submitted to the CXC no later than April 30 of the year of the examination.
Note: The school is advised to keep a copy of the assignment for each candidate as well
as copies of the mark sheets.
(ii) Teachers will be required to submit to CXC a copy of the assignment/project set by the
teacher as well as copies of the assignments of a sample of candidates as indicated by CXC.
This sample will be re-marked by CXC for moderation purposes.
SAMPLE SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT
SAMPLE SBA 1
Carnival has long been a traditional cultural festival in several Caribbean territories. Every year, thousands
of costumed masqueraders parade through the streets, dancing to the pulsating sounds of steelband, calypso
and soca. Most of these revelers register to participate in the band of their choice months before the
festivities begin. Organizers of these bands must utilize management and organizational skills in order to
stage a successful event. As a bandleader of one these carnival bands, you are required to utilize suitable
Wordprocessing, spreadsheet, database management as well as a programming application to design and
implement computer-based solutions to the tasks involved in the management of your carnival band.
Spreadsheet
The financial records of the band are maintained using a spreadsheet application. The names of
masqueraders are listed by section. Both men as well as women may register to play in each section. There
are five sections in the band. The cost of costumes is quoted in US dollars. The cost by section is $160,
$220, $280, $350 and $425 respectively. Masqueraders are given the option of paying for the costume in
three installments, or paying the full cost in one payment. Many people utilize the installment option.
Single full payment attracts a discount of 10%, while payment by installments attracts an interest of 15%.
Installments should be spread over three equal payments.
Each masquerader pays an ‘Inclusive’ fee. A $150 Inclusive fee entitles the masquerader to food, drinks,
access to portable bathroom facilities and bottled water during the carnival parade through the streets.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 32
However, a payment of $50.00 entitles the masquerader to portable bathroom facilities and bottled water
only.
Expenditure is incurred in the provision of several amenities for masqueraders during the carnival. The
bandleader must supply food, drinks, portable bathroom facilities, transportation, music, security personnel,
and artiste fees. In addition, the costs of material for the manufacture of costumes as well as labour costs
are incurred.
Because of the anticipated large number of masqueraders, the bandleader has decided to manage the income
and expenditure of each section separately.
You are required to:
1. Design a worksheet(s) which accepts income and expenditure costs for each section.
Your worksheet must record all payments made by masqueraders, (a few persons have only made
one or two of the required three installment payments on costumes), the total amount paid by each
person as well as the grand total collected must be calculated. Costume payments must be made in
US dollars. The total payments made by each person however, must be converted to the equivalent
amount in local currency.
In an appropriate row, count the number of masqueraders in the section; calculate the total payment
on costume, Inclusive fees and the total overall payment.
The expenditure incurred for each section must also be calculated. Food is $60.00 per person;
drink is $40.00 per person; material is $150.00 and labour is $75.00. Other services are provided
at a flat rate for the entire band. These are as follows: bathroom- $3000.00; transport $2500.00;
music - $4000.00; security - $1800.00; artiste - $5000.00. The cost of each flat rate services for each
section = Rate /No. of Sections.
Food and drinks are increased by 15% of the starting per person cost for each successive section,
material is increased by 12% of the starting cost for each successive section, while labour is increased
by 8% of the starting cost for each successive section.
The total cost of each service for each section = Cost of service X the number of masqueraders in
the section.
Save your spreadsheet as Masqueraders1.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 33
2. Modify your spreadsheet to effect the following changes:
(a) Insert a masquerader before the last person in each of the first three sections.
(b) Delete the third masquerader from each of the last two sections.
(c) Create a table that shows the total income and total expenditure by sections.
Save your spreadsheet as Masqueraders2.
3. Perform the following modifications to your worksheet.
(a) The cost of raw materials has decreased. Change the initial cost of materials from
$150.00 to 135.00.
(b) Labour costs however, have increased. The starting cost of sewing costumes for the first
section is now $95.00.
(c) Due to inflation, it has become necessary to increase the cost of food and drink from 15%
to 20%. However, the first section has been spared this price hike.
(d) Sort the first two sections in descending order by Total Payment.
(e) Sort the third and fourth sections in ascending order by Name, then by cost.
(f) Create an appropriate chart which compares the income and expenditure of each section.
Give this chart a suitable name.
(g) Create an appropriate chart, with appropriate data labels, which shows the distribution of
expenditure for any one named section.
Save your spreadsheet as Masqueraders3.
Database Management
You should use a suitable application to manage data on persons who have registered to play in your band.
Personal data on each applicant, such as name, sex, address, age, size and telephone contact. must be stored.
Masqueraders’ payment data must also be stored. The cost of costumes varies by section. Costume prices
range from US$160 to US$425. In addition, the section of the band in which they choose to play must be
recorded. The band has five named sections. Each section has a specific four-digit section code. Your
database should contain three tables. Using data from your spreadsheet, populate your database with data
on at least twelve but not more than fifteen persons in each section.
You should test your database by performing queries to show:
1. The name, age, size and address of all persons registered to play in a named section Name this
query Section.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 34
2. The ID Number, name, sex, and age of all female masqueraders between twenty and thirty years
old. Name this query Twenties Ladies.
3. The ID Number, LastName, section and total payment of all persons who have paid in full for their
costume in a given section. The data supplied should be sorted by Last name. Name this query
Paidup.
4. The bandleader has experienced difficulty in securing the advertised material for the costumes in
the third section. He has therefore decided to give a 15% rebate on the total payment made to all
persons in this section. Calculate this rebate and show it along with the name, address and total
payment of all persons in one named section. Name this query Rebate.
5. As an incentive to attract more female masqueraders to his band, the bandleader has decided to
give a gift voucher to the value of 12% of the total payment to all females registered in the band.
Show the name, sex, total payment and voucher value for all female revelers. Name this query
GiftVoucher.
6. Two revelers have asked to be refunded their payments, as they were forced to travel prior to the
date of the carnival. Delete all records that pertain to these two named persons.
7. Generate a report that shows the names, ID Number, section, age and total payments for all
revelers who have paid in full for their costumes. The report should be grouped by section and
sorted in descending order by LastName, then by FirstName. The report should calculate and
show the total amount of funds paid by the revelers of each section. The average payment of each
section should also be generated as well as the grand total of payments made. This report should
be given a suitable title utilizing two lines.
Wordprocessing
1. Create a full page an advertisement for a local newspaper that informs the public about your
carnival band. This must be designed on letter size paper.
2. Using a suitable feature of your wordprocessing application, create a document which should be
mailed to persons who have paid on full for their costumes. The document should inform
masqueraders of the parade route, the time of assembly and departure of the band onto the parade.
The report from the database section should be inserted into your document.
The final paragraph should express the bandleaders gratitude to masquerades for choosing to join
his band for the carnival celebrations.
3. Design a suitable letterhead for your document which should be placed in a header.
A suitable footer must be inserted, with the words center aligned.
4. The document should be justified. The left margin must be 1.5”.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 35
Problem-Solving
1. Develop an algorithm or write pseudocode that accepts as input the names of an unspecified
number of masqueraders who each have paid the full cost of their costume and the amount each
has paid. A masquerader may have paid for a costume in any of the five sections in the band. The
algorithm should determine the section in which a masquerader plays based on the amount he/she
has paid for the costume. The algorithm should also determine the number of masqueraders who
have paid for costumes in each section. The names of persons and the section for which they have
paid should be printed. A listing of section and the total number of persons registered to play in
each section should also be printed, along with the total amount of money paid in each section.
2. Using data from your database, make a random listing of persons who have paid in full for their
costumes. The listing should contain the IDNumber, and full amount paid by each masquerader
for his/her costume and should be chosen randomly from each of the five sections. No more
than twelve persons should be selected. Using this listing, design a trace table that traces the
number of masqueraders in each section, the amount paid, and traces the total amount collected
in each section.
Program Implementation
3. Using the programming language Pascal, write program code to implement the algorithm in (1).
SAMPLE SBA 2
Description of the Project
National general elections have been a recurring feature among the democratic territories of the Caribbean.
Every year, in one territory or another, citizens exercise their right to elect a government of their choice.
However, the exercise is not without its attendant challenges of data management. Thousands of votes are
cast on the day of the elections and an anxious, waiting public demands speed, efficiency and accuracy in
the determination of results.
In preparation for the actual exercise, the Trinbarjam Elections Commission has hired you to simulate the
elections exercise as a test run, prior to the actual elections which are to take place shortly in your country.
You are required to utilize suitable wordprocessing, spreadsheet, database management as well as a
programming application to design and implement computer-based solutions to the tasks involved in the
simulation of the election process.
Spreadsheet
The Elections Commission has mandated that you design a spreadsheet that will accept pertinent data on
constituencies and candidates’ votes and generate information that would enable the outcome of the
elections to be divulged to the population in the shortest possible time. Four parties contest the elections:
the Democratic Action Party (DAP), the Workers National Alliance (WNA), the United Progressive
Movement (UPM), and the Peoples Democratic Revolution (PDR). Elections are contested to determine
representatives in eleven constituencies. The representative being the candidate who gets the most votes in
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 36
his/her constituency. The parties field candidates in every constituency except for the PDR, which fields
candidates in just six of the eight constituencies.
For each constituency, you are required to:
1. Create a table in your spreadsheet that records the number of Electors, Percentage voter turnout,
Number of votes cast, the percentage of Spoilt ballots and the number of General votes.
The number of electors registered in each constituency ranges from 6,250 to 10,795. The
percentage voter turnout in each constituency is projected to be from a low of 45% to a high of
82%. Number of votes cast is determined by the Number of Electors * % Voter Turnout. The
percentage of spoilt ballots varies from one constituency to another, but never exceeds 2.5% in any
constituency. General votes are calculated as the votes cast – spoilt votes.
For each constituency, design a spreadsheet that accepts the candidate’s name, party acronym,
rating, % of votes, and number of votes received. The rating is a value from 1 to 4 and is
determined by the results of a recent poll conducted in each constituency by a noted pollster.
Apart from the candidate’s rating, the pollster also supplies the % of votes each candidate is likely
to receive, based on the popularity rating. The actual number of votes received is that percentage
of the General votes.
You must enter data for each candidate in each of the eight constituencies.
Save your spreadsheet as Elections 01.
2. Modify your spreadsheet to reflect the following.
(i) Votes cast by Special voters must be considered and counted. Insert a row in an
appropriate part of your spreadsheet table to record the number of special votes cast in
each constituency.
(ii) Insert a column in an appropriate part of your spreadsheet to record the number of special
votes received by each candidate. The special votes for each constituency are divided
equally among the candidates in that constituency. Insert another column which records
the total votes received by each candidate in each constituency. Total votes received are
calculated as General votes + Special votes.
(iii) Insert rows in appropriate part of your spreadsheet that calculate, for each constituency,
the total number of special votes, and the total number of votes received by candidates.
(iv) Insert a column that indicates whether a refund is due to a candidate. This column should
state “Refund Due” or “No Refund”. A refund is due if the candidate’s total votes received
equals or exceeds 20% of Votes Cast in the constituency.
Save your spreadsheet as Elections 02.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 37
3. Perform further modifications to your spreadsheet to reflect the following.
(i) In an appropriate part of your spreadsheet, create a table that lists the constituencies, and
the total number of votes received by each party in each constituency.
(ii) Sort the candidates’ data for each constituency. This should be sorted in descending order
on total votes received.
(iii) Generate a column graph that compares the votes received by each party by constituency.
Name this graph ‘Votes by Constituency’.
(iv) Generate a graph that compares the parties by name (acronym) and the total number of
votes each received in the election. Each slice of the chart must be labeled to show the
number of votes received and the % of votes received overall. Name this chart ‘Vote
Distribution by Party’.
Save your spreadsheet as Elections 03.
Database Management
You are asked to use a suitable application to manage data on candidates nominated to contest seats in the
general elections. Three tables/files must be used to store the data. Relevant personal data on each
candidate should be stored, including name, address, date of birth, sex, profession, constituency, party
acronym and total votes received. Each candidate pays a deposit of $5000. (This deposit is refunded should
the candidate garner 20% or more of the votes cast in his constituency).
Constituency data must also be maintained, including the constituency name, number of electors, number
of votes cast, and number of special votes. The name and acronym of each party must also be stored. Data
must be sourced from the spreadsheet section of your project.
You should test your database by generating queries to find the following.
1. The candidate ID, name, sex, age and profession of all candidates from the Peoples Democratic
Revolution (PDR).
2. The candidate name, party acronym, number of electors and number of votes received for
candidates in constituencies with more than 6500 voters and where the candidates received less
than 500 of the votes cast.
3. Special votes expressed as a percentage of the overall number of voters in each constituency. Your
query should also show the constituency name field. The percentage should be expressed to two
places of decimal.
4. The candidates who received less than 20% of votes in their constituencies. Your query should
show the candidate(s) name, party acronym, constituency, number of voters and votes received.
5. All male candidates who are less than or equal to 40 years old and who received more than 40% of
the votes cast in their respective constituencies. You must also show the dates of birth, name,
number of votes received as well as the number of voters.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 38
6. Calculate the sum of the deposits to be refunded to each party (only candidates who received 20
percent or more of votes are eligible for refund). Show the party name, acronym and sum
refunded to each party.
Generate a report which lists the final results of the election. The report should list the constituency, party
acronym, number of votes received, sex and name of candidates. The report should be sorted by
constituency. Within each constituency the report should be sorted by number of votes received. It should
also give the total and average number of votes cast in each constituency. The report should have a two-line
title as follows:
“Official Results
Trinbarjam National Elections”
Wordprocessing
1. Each candidate must complete and submit a nomination form to the Trinbarjam Elections
Commission. You are required to design the nomination form. It must allow for the entry of
relevant data on the candidate, including the constituency which he intends to contest.
The form must be designed on letter sized paper and must have a 0.7” margin on the left and right
sides. The letterhead of the Trinbarjam Elections Commission must be placed at the top.
2. The results of the national elections must be delivered to every candidate. Using a suitable feature
of your Wordprocessing application, and data from the database section of your project, create a
document which should be mailed to candidates. The letter should come from the Chairman of
the Trinbarjam Elections Commission.
The first paragraph should congratulate and thank the candidate (insert candidate’s name in the
letter) for the manner in which he/she conducted his/her campaign and invite him/her to view the
complete listing of results.
Insert the report “Official Elections Results” from your database into the document at this point.
The final paragraph should congratulate the winners, and the winning party. The chairman should
then invite who are qualify for a refund to visit the head office of the Commission to collect their
deposit payment.
You are required to print letters addressed to the first three and last candidate only from your
database listing.
The commission’s letterhead should be placed at the head of your document and an appropriate
footer inserted. The text in the footer must be center aligned.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 39
Problem-Solving
1. Develop an algorithm or write pseudocode to determine the winning candidate for a constituency
in the national elections. The algorithm must accept as input the names of the four candidates and
the number of votes each candidate receives. The successful candidate is the one who received the
most votes.
Print the name of the winner and the number of votes he/she received.
2. Design and execute a trace table that accepts vote data at a polling station in a constituency. Data
should include special votes, general (valid) votes and spoilt votes. Votes should be cast for any
one of four parties, DAP, WNA, UPM or PDR. The table should trace the increment of each vote
category and determine which party secured the majority of votes. The table should have at least
ten iterations and should end when a specific value is entered.
Program Implementation
3. Using the programming language Pascal, write program code to implement the algorithm in (1)
above.
SAMPLE SBA 3
Description of the Project
The citizens of Trinbarjam, a country in the English-speaking Caribbean, are unable to purchase housing
for their families, mainly due to the extremely high cost of real estate and building materials. Middle and
low income earners are severely affected. The government, through its agency, the Housing Construction
Corporation, has intervened however, and has embarked on an extensive house building exercise in three
selected parts of the country.
Citizens were invited to apply for the chance to own one of these homes. You are asked to use wordprocessing, spreadsheet and database management applications to design and implement computer-based
solutions to ensure that the public is well informed of the government’s new housing initiative; that an
efficient record of applicants’ information is maintained; applicants’ financial income and expense
commitments are accurately calculated and assessed and that suitably qualified and approved applicants are
duly informed.
Spreadsheet
Housing Construction Corporation is a state agency mandated to provide affordable housing for middle
and low income earners. The Housing Construction Corporation invites applications from nationals who
are employed and who can demonstrate that they would be able to meet their mortgage payments each
month. Each application must be supported by documents giving details of the applicant’s financial status.
These include the applicant’s salary and monthly salary deductions. The amount owed to banks and other
financial institutions must also be disclosed with supporting verifying documents. In addition, details of
applicants’ monthly expenses on groceries, utilities, transportation, etc. must be submitted.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 40
Homes are being built to accommodate approved applicants in three communities: Clarendon Court, Sangre
Grande Villas and Providence Gardens. Applicants, who are middle and low income earners, must meet a
net monthly income in order to qualify for consideration in each of these communities: $12,500,
$9,500 and $7,500 respectively. This net income may be met by the applicant himself/herself or in
conjunction with his/her spouse.
You are required to:
1. Design a spreadsheet that accepts income data from applicants for each housing community. You
may accept at least ten but no more than fifteen applications for each community:
Income
Applicant Salary Spouse Salary Gross Net
Applicant Salary Deductions Salary Deductions Income Income Status
Michael James 8,560.00 2,295.00 6,490.00 1,777.50 15,050.00 10,977.50 Qualified
Monthly deductions from salary include PAYE tax, health surcharge, union dues and payments to
pension plan. No tax is deducted should the applicant’s salary be $5,000 or less. A flat rate of 8%
is deducted on the amount in excess of 5,000. Health surcharge is fixed at $155.00 per month
while Union dues are 2% of salary. Pension deduction is 15% of salary. In a small number of
instances, applicants’ spouses are unemployed. If the net income meets the qualifying income for
the housing community applied for as specified by the Housing Construction Corporation, the
applicant’s status would be “Qualified”, else “Not qualified” should be recorded. All deduction
rates are subject to change.
(a) You must enter income data and use appropriate formulae to calculate deductions, gross
income, and net income and determine whether the application qualifies for
consideration.
In another section of your spreadsheet, information on applicants’ loan indebtedness should be
recorded and calculated. Total amounts owed with respect to bank loans, credit card loans and
credit union loans must be revealed.
Loans
Total Loan Amounts Monthly Payments
Credit Credit Bank Credit Card Credit Union Total Loan
Applicant Bank Card Union Payment Payment Payment Payments
Michael
James $15,780.00 $1,100.00 $14,890.00 $ 439.65 $105.42 $ 414.11 $ 959.17
(i) Repayment on bank loans is calculated as equal monthly payments over three years at a
simple interest of 8% of the starting loan amount.
(ii) Repayment on credit card loans is calculated as equal monthly payments over 18 months at
a simple interest of 10% of the starting loan amount.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 41
(iii) Repayment on Credit union loans is calculated as equal monthly payments over three years
at a simple interest of 5%. An additional $300.00 is added to the loan repayment amount
each month for the purchase of shares in the credit union.
Some applicants do not have credit cards, and just a few do not have loans with the credit
union.
All interest rates are subject to change.
(b) You must enter loan information for each applicant and use appropriate formulae to
calculate monthly repayments. Insert a column to calculate each applicant’s total monthly
payments on loans.
In an appropriate section of your spreadsheet, information on each applicant’s monthly
expenses must be calculated. Each applicant must provide realistic estimates of monthly
expenses on groceries, utilities (water, telephone and electricity), transportation, and
miscellaneous expenses. A column stating the applicant’s number of dependants must be
included. Miscellaneous expense is calculated as number of dependants x $75.00
(c) You must enter expense information for each applicant. Insert a column to calculate each
applicant’s total monthly expenses.
For each housing community, insert at table which lists each applicant’s Net Income, Total
Monthly Loan Repayments, and Total Monthly Expenses and Balance. Balance is calculated as Net
Income – sum of Repayments and Expenses. Add a column that states whether the applicant has
been approved or not approved for housing allocation. An application is approved if the Balance is
equal to or exceeds one half of Net Income.
Create a suitable chart that compares each applicant’s net income, total loan payment, and total
monthly expenses (from the named housing community). Give an appropriate name to this chart.
Print this chart.
Save your spreadsheet as LoanApplication 01. Print this spreadsheet.
2. The economy has been further severely affected by international fiscal initiatives. To adjust to
these realities and to offset any losses, banks have increased their interest on loans to 10% and
credit cards companies now apply an interest of 15%. The qualifying income on homes however,
has been reduced to $10,000, $7,500 and $5,500 respectively.
Make the necessary changes such that your spreadsheet’s values adjust to these changes.
Save this spreadsheet as LoanApplication 02.
Print the spreadsheet with adjusted information on applicants for any ONE housing community.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 42
3. (a) For each housing community, sort the applicants’ Income information in descending order on
net income; Loans information in descending order on total loan payments, and Expenses
first in descending order by total expenses, then by number of dependants.
(b) In an appropriate part of your spreadsheet, create a table that lists the Net Income, Total
Monthly Loan Payments and Total Monthly Expenses for approved applicants from ALL
three housing communities.
(c) Create a suitable chart that compares the financial records of these approved applicants.
Name this chart Approved Applicants.
Save your spreadsheet as LoanApplication 03.
Print the spreadsheet with data from any ONE housing community.
Database Management
1. Information must be maintained on all applicants for housing units. Using information from your
spreadsheet, you are required to design and populate a database with applicant data. You may
accept at least thirty but no more than forty five applicants.
2. Required personal information on applicants should include Applicant ID, title, name, sex,
address, date of birth, marital status, number of dependants, and telephone number and housing
community.
3. Applicant ID is a five digit number in the format XXX07 where XXX is any number between 100
and 999. Applicants must be at least twenty years old but not older than forty-five.
4. Financial data on each applicant is also required. These include net income, total monthly
expenses, total monthly repayment, and whether application is approved or not.
5. Dependant data is a third area of information required in respect of each applicant. The name of
each applicant’s dependant(s) must be submitted.
You are required to:
(i) Design and create database tables (files) to meet the required criteria.
(ii) Appropriate data types /field widths are to be used when designing the structure of each
table.
(iii) Print all tables (files) populated with appropriate records.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 43
Your database should respond to the following queries.
(a) List the last name, address (street and town), phone number, net income and number of
dependants of all applicants who listed Clarendon Court as their choice for housing
allocation. Name this query Clarendon Applicants.
(b) List the name, applicantD and total monthly expenses of all applicants whose total
monthly loan repayment exceed one thousand five hundred dollars. Name this query
LoanPayment.
(c) Count the number of persons who applied for homes in Sangre Grande Villas. Name this
query SangreGrandeCount.
(d) The age of the applicant may be a factor in determining housing allocation priority. List
the name and date of birth of all applicants who are between the ages of twenty and thirty,
inclusive. Name this query TwentytoThirty.
(e) Perform a query to add a further ten percent to the salary of Providence Gardens’
applicants. Name this query ProvidenceGrace. Print the table showing Providence
Gardens applicant’s updated net income.
(f) The HCC wants to know the disposable income of Clarendon Court’s applicants. Perform
a query which subtracts the sum of their total loan payments and total expenses from their
net income. Print the names loan payment, expenses and disposable income of each
Clarendon Court applicant. Name this query Balance.
(g) Prepare a report which lists the names of all applicants whose application have been
approved for housing unit allocation. The report must show each applicant’s title, name,
applicantID, address, and housing community. The report should be sorted by community
then by last name. For each grouping level the report must indicate the applicants’ average
net income. A grand total of income and load payments and expenses should be indicated
at the end of the report. The first line of the report title should be Approved Applicants.
Wordprocessing
1. You are to design an application form on which nationals may apply to the Housing Construction
Corporation for housing allocation. The application form must be designed on letter size paper (8
½” x 11”) using suitable features of a Wordprocessing application. Relevant personal information
as well as the applicant’s financial information must be solicited. There should be a space for the
applicant’s signature. The left and right margins of the form must be 0.8” The top and bottom
margins must be set to 1.0”
On the reverse side of the application form you are to design a flyer intended to inform the public
about the homes being constructed and the qualifying requirements for each housing community.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 44
2. Individuals whose applications have been approved must be duly informed by the Housing
Construction Corporation. Write a letter which congratulates successful applicants and informs
that their applications have been approved. The paragraph should contain the statement “Please
find a listing of all applicants whose applications have been approved. Please check to ensure that
your name is listed:”
Insert the report named ‘Approved Applicants’ from the database.
A final paragraph should give information about the proposed dates for the formal opening of the
housing communities.
Using the mail merge feature of your Wordprocessing program, and data from your database, this
letter must be sent from the office of the Chief Executive Officer of the HCC and addressed to the
first four and to the last mentioned approved applicant.
Problem-Solving
1. Develop an algorithm or write pseudocode to determine whether an applicant is approved for
allocation of a home in a named housing community. The algorithm/ pseudocode should accept
the name of the applicant and his/her gross salary as well as salary deductions. The net salary
should be calculated. An applicant qualifies if the net salary is above the qualifying salary for that
housing community. The algorithm should then determine whether the applicant is approved.
Approval is granted should the sum of applicant’s expenses and repayments not exceed half of the
balance.
2. Design and execute a trace table that accepts data for applicants of one housing community. The
table should accept the net salary, total expense, and total repayment amount for each
applicant. The balance should be determined. The approval status should be determined
(applicant is approved if balance >= one half of net income). The number of applicants as well as
the number of approved applicants should be counted. In addition the average net income and
average balance of approved applicants should be determined.
Program Implementation
3. Using the programming language Pascal, write program code to implement the algorithm in (1)
above.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 45
♦ RECOMMENDED TEXTS
Birbal, R. and Taylor, M. Log On to IT for CSEC, Essex: Pearson/Longman, 2005.
Cotton, S., Teager, G. and Austin, R. Megabyte, Oxford: University Press, 2002.
Gay, G. and Blades, R. Information Technology for CXC CSEC, Oxford: University
Press, 2005.
Holligan, J. and Doyle, S. IT FOR CSEC, Cheltenham: Nelson Thornes, 2006.
Jamrich, P. and Oja, D. New Perspectives on Computer Concepts, 10th edition, Course
Technology, Washington D.C.: Thomson Publishing,
2007.
Nance, D. Fundamentals of Pascal: Understanding Programming and
Problem Solving, 3rd Edition, Washington D.C.: South –
Western Educational Publishing, April 1997.
Robertson, L. Simple Program Design – A Step by Step Approach, Course
Technology, Washington D.C., 2006.
Skeete, K. CXC Information Technology, Cambridge: University Press,
2004.
Website
http://www.learn-programming.za.net/learn_pascal_programming.html
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 46
♦ GLOSSARY
WORD DEFINITION
Address The identification of a particular location in memory where a data item
or instruction is stored.
Algorithm A sequence of instructions which rigorously defines a solution to a
problem.
Antiglare screen A polarized screen attached to the front of the monitor, which reduces
eye strain.
Assembler A program which converts ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE into MACHINE
CODE to be used by a computer.
Automation Computer control of machines and processes.
Backing storage Memory external to the computer used for storage of large quantities of
data or large programs. Backing store is also known as secondary store,
auxiliary store or external store.
Bandwidth A characteristic of a communication channel that determines the speed
at which data can be transmitted over the channel.
Bar code A series of thick and thin black bars separated by spaces of varying
widths representing data.
Baud A unit of speed in data transmission system which now represents one
data signal per second.
BCD BCD is an abbreviation for Binary-Coded-Decimal. In this number
system, each digit of a number is written as a BINARY number, rather
than converting the whole number. For example, 47 would be coded as
01000111, the binary codes for 4 and 7. Contrast this with 101111,
which is the true binary code of 47.
Bistable device A device which can exist in two discrete stable states.
Bit An acronym for binary digit. It can have a value of 1 or 0.
Blog Short for "Web log". A blog is an online journal or diary of an individual’s
opinions and latest news. It is updated regularly, in chronological order. Many
blogs allow visitors to make comments, or “postings” in response to the blogger, or
to ask questions.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 47
WORD DEFINITION
Broadband A term used to describe a technology that provides bandwidth that is greater than
that provided by ordinary telephone lines, that is, greater than 64 kilobits per
second. The greater the bandwidth, the greater the data-carrying capacity.
Broadcast The transmission of data to all connected stations simultaneously.
Bulletin board An electronic equivalent of a conventional bulletin board. It is used as
part of a communication network where users can post messages, read
messages posted by other users, communicate with the system operator
and upload or download programs.
Byte A group of eight bits, usually representing a single character.
CADD Acronym for computer-aided design and drafting. The use of computers
and graphics in design and drafting process.
CAM Acronym for computer-aided manufacturing. The use of computers to
control machines in the manufacturing process.
Character One of the set of symbols that may be represented in a computer.
Characters may be letters, digits, symbols.
Character codes Binary patters used to represent characters in a computer system.
Compiler A program that translates the source program into executable machine
code, and saves the code to a file (the object program) for later
execution.
CPU Central Processing Unit
Data corruption The introduction of errors into data stored in a computer system.
Database A collection of data files that may be used by a number of applications
with storage and access to the data controlled by a set of programs
known as Database Management System. (DBMS)
Database
management system
Programs and database files that allow timely and easy controlled access
to data by a number of users.
Data flow diagram A pictorial representation of a network of processes linked by arrows
illustrating the flow of data to and from processes in a system.
Decision table A pictorial representation of program logic illustrating, in the form of a
table, the appropriate actions to be taken for each combination of
conditions.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 48
Direct mode The passing of COMMANDS to the OPERATING SYSTEM without
the use of a program. Certain commands such a RUN, SAVE, and
LOAD are nearly always used in direct mode by typing the command
words on the keyboard then pressing the return key. Interpreted
language like BASIC permit a much wider range of direct mode
commands.
Down-load Process whereby programs or data are transferred via communications
channels, from a computer and stored on media located at the user’s
computer.
Dry-run A manual traversal of the logic of a program.
Duplex A transmission system that allows data to be transmitted in both
directions at the same time. This system is sometimes called Full Duplex.
DVD Digital Video Disk or Digital Versatile Disk. A high-density compact disk for
storing large amounts of data, especially high-resolution audio-visual material.
EBCDIC An acronym for Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code.
The code uses eight binary positions for each character thus allowing a
character set of 256 characters.
Electronic mail Mail or messages transmitted electronically by computers via
communication channels. It is usual for such messages to be held in a
central store for retrieval at the user’s convenience.
EPROM Erasable programmable read-only memory. A type of memory chip that
can be erased by removing it from the circuit and exposing it to
ultraviolet light. The chip can then be reprogrammed.
Expert system A software package that acts as a consultant or expert to the user. It is
“expert’ in a specialized application or area and provides assistance to the
user in solving problems in that area.
Feasibility study In-depth study of an application area for the purpose of establishing
whether automation would be cost effective. In general, the expected
benefits should exceed the combined cost of installing the computer and
developing the system.
Field (1) A section of a record containing data relating to one attribute of
an entity.
(2) Part of a machine instruction containing an operation or address.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 49
Floppy disk A flexible magnetic coated disk, commonly used with microcomputers,
on which data can be stored magnetically.
Font A family or collection of characters (letters, punctuation marks, numbers
and special characters) of a particular size and style.
Fourth generation
language (4GL)
A computer programming language which allows the program to specify
“what” is to be achieved rather than “how” it is to be achieved. For
example, database languages.
Gigabyte The equivalent of approximately one billion bytes.
Half duplex A transmission system that allows data to be transmitted in one direction
at a time. That is the system can transmit and receive data but not at the
same time.
Hard disk A rigid disk used for storing data magnetically. Its rigid construction
allows for higher storage densities. Access times for a hard disk are
much faster than for floppy disks.
Hardware The physical components of a computer system such as the Central
Processing Unit (CPU), memory, input, output, and storage devices.
Home page The file available for access at a web site intended chiefly to greet visitors, provide
information about the site, and direct them to other sites with related
information.
HTML Hyper Text Markup Language. A markup language used to structure text and
multimedia documents used extensively on the World Wide Web.
HTTP Hyper Text Transfer Protocol. A protocol used to request and transmit files,
especially Web pages and Web page components, over the Internet or other
computer network.
IDE Acronym for I ntelligent Drive E lectronics or I ntegrated Drive E lectronics. An
IDE interface is an interface for mass storage devices, in which the controller is
integrated into the disk or CD-ROM drive.
Immediate access storage The memory within the central processor. Also referred to as internal
use or main store.
Indexing Creating a secondary file which contains pointers to items in an
associated database file and allows rapid location of records in the file.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 50
Information Meaningful knowledge produced from raw data files.
Information retrieval The process of retrieving specific information from data files.
Integrated package This package combines several applications in a suite of programs. Most
of these packages combine a word processor; spreadsheet and database
program. Data are shared easily between these integrated programs.
Internet The Internet is the largest computer network system in the world. It
consists of many smaller networks connected together by a global public
network. The Internet is often called the information superhighway or
cyberspace.
Intranet An intranet is a private network that belongs to an organization, and is designed to
be accessible only by the organization's members, employees, or others with
authorization When part of an intranet is made accessible to customers, partners,
suppliers, or others outside the company, that part is called an extranet.
Interpreter A computer program which interactively translates and executes a source
program without permanently storing any executable code.
Invoke Process of starting up a program by using its name (or selecting its icon).
Joystick An input device that uses a lever to control movement of the cursor or
graphic images.
Justification This is the adjustment of alignment of one or more lines of text with a
particular margin, for example, alignment with the left margin, the right
margin or both. The term justification often is used to refer to full
justification of the alignment of text along both margins.
Keyboarding The process of rapidly and accurately entering data into a computer via
the keyboard as an input device.
Key-to-disk Keyboard entry of data directly to magnetic disk without previous
preparation on another medium.
Kilobyte One thousand and Twenty-four bytes.
LAN Acronym for Local Area Network. A type of computer network where
two or more computers are directly linked within a small area such as a
room or building site. A common characteristic of this system is that
computers are linked by direct cables rather than by telecommunication
lines.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 51
Light pen A light-sensitive input device which when it touches the screen detects
the presence or absence of light. It is used to select an entry or indicate a
position.
Magnetic disk A mylar (floppy disk) or metallic (hard disk) circular plate on which
electronic data can be stored magnetically. Suitable for direct or random
access data storage and retrieval.
Mail-merge A facility found in full fledged Wordprocessing programs that draws
information from a database, usually a mailing list, to print multiple
copies of a document. Each copy contains some common text but each
bearing different addresses.
Main-memory See immediate access storage.
Mainframe A large-scale computer with a variety of peripheral devices, a large
amount of backing store and a fast CPU. The term is often used in
comparison with a smaller or subordinate computer. It should be noted
that there is no clear dividing line between mainframes and
minicomputers.
Margins Space provided to the left, right, top and/or bottom of a page of text or data.
Menu A screen listing commands of action or alternatives to lead the user
through an interactive program.
Menu-driven Interface A Program interface where the user is provided with a list of operations.
Merge The combination of two or more files on the basis of common field (key
field).
MICR Magnetic Ink Character Recognition.
MIDI Musical Instrument Digital Interface. A standard for representing
musical information in a digital format.
Microcomputer A computer based on a microprocessor. See definition of microprocessor
below.
Microfiche An output medium consisting of microfilm sheets. Very high density
storage can be attained using this method of storage.
Microfloppy disk Refers to 3.5 inch floppy floppy disks. They are housed in rigid plastic
casting having a sliding shutter which automatically closes when the disk
is removed from the disk drive.
Microprocessor A single chip which contains the arithmetic/logic unit (ALU) and the
control unit (CU).
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 52
Minicomputer A computer whose size, speed and capabilities lie between those of a
mainframe and a microcomputer.
Modem Acronym for modulator-demodulator. A device that converts signals
from analogue to digital and vice versa. A modem allows computers to
exchange information through telephones lines.
Monitor A television-like device used to display data.
Mouse An input device that controls the movement of the cursor. The cursor
moves in response to the movement of the mouse on a flat surface.
Multiprogramming The ability of a computer to execute two or more programs at the same time,
using one CPU (or processor).
Multiprocessing The ability of a computer to execute programs on two more processors
simultaneously. The program is distributed over several processors.
Multitasking The concurrent execution (at the same time) of two or more rel a ted tasks. A
group of cooperating tasks is executed simultaneously to achieve a common goal.
Narrowband A term used to describe a technology that provides bandwidth that is less than or
equal to that provided by ordinary telephone lines. That is, 64 kilobits per second
or less.
Natural language
processing
The use of the computer to understand and translate a natural language,
like English, into commands to perform a given operation.
Network A network is a group of connected computers that exchange information and
share equipment.
Numeric Data comprising digits on which mathematical operations can be
performed by a computer system.
Object code Machine language program produced by a compiler.
On-line The term is used to describe peripheral devices under the control of the processor.
Off-line Describes peripheral devices that operate independently and are not under the
control of the processor.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 53
Operating system A set of programs that control and supervise the resources of a computer
system. It also acts as an interface between the user and the computer.
Peripheral Any hardware device connected to and controlled by the central
processing unit.
Plotter An output device specially designed to produce a hard copy of graphical
data.
Point of sale terminal A device that reads data at the source of a transaction (for example. a
supermarket checkout) and stores it for subsequent transmission directly
to the computer system for processing.
Podcasting A form of audio broadcasting using the Internet; podcasting takes its name from a
combination of “iPod” and broadcasting. It is a method of releasing files to the
Internet, allowing users to subscribe and receive new files automatically.
Printer A device specially designed to produce a hard copy of computer output.
Protocol A set of rules and procedures controlling the transmitting and receiving of
data so that different devices can communicate with each other.
Pseudocode A language consisting of English-like statements used to define
algorithm.
Real-time A processing mode in which the passage of real-time is critical to the
application.
Register A permanent location in the internal memory of a processor used for the
temporary storage of data during processing operations.
Record A collection of fields on data related to one entity.
Resolution A characteristic of a monitor’s screen, determined by the number of
pixels that can be displayed by it.
SATA Acronym for Serial Advanced Technology Attachment. It is a computer
bus primarily designed for transfer of data between a computer and mass
storage devices such as hard disk drives and optical drives.
SCSI Acronym for Small Computer System Interface. It is a set of standards
for physically connecting and transferring data between computers and
peripheral devices. SCSI is most commonly used for hard disks and tape
drives, but it can connect a wide range of other devices, including
scanners and CD drives.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 54
Sector A pie-shaped division of each disk track.
Simplex A transmission system that allows data transfer in one direction only.
Software A collection of programs, procedures and routines which direct the
operations of a computer.
Software package A fully documented program or set of programs generalised and
designed to be used with little or no modification.
Sort Redistribution of data into an order on the basis of the contents of a key
item (sort-key).
Source code Program written in high level language or assembly level language.
Source document A document used for the initial recording of data relating to business
transactions. Very often source data needs to be converted into
machine-readable form for example, punched cards or paper tape, before
it can be processed by a computer.
Spell-check A dictionary feature associated with a word processor which allows the
user to easily detect and correct errors in spelling. One can add new
words to the dictionary so that the latter may grow with usage e.g. in
WordPerfect, WordStar and Microsoft Word.
Syntax A set of rules defining the structure of statements in a programming
language.
Telecommunication The process of transmitting data between devices using transmission
facilities such as telephone lines or microwave links.
TCP/IP TCP/IP stands for Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol. These are a
set of rules and regulations followed by computers on the Internet to
communicate.
Telecommuting A method of working where an off-site employee uses computer and a
communication channel to communicate with the office computer.
Telemarketing The employment of telephone lines and computers to market products
and manage accounts.
Terminal The combination of a monitor and keyboard to input and check data
and to view output. A terminal does not necessarily include a processor.
Template A specification of the number of fields and the kinds of data which fields
in a database record are allowed to hold.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 55
Touch terminal Also called a touch screen. A device that allows data to be input by
touching a screen with the finger or other object. The surface of the
screen consists of a number of programmed touch points each of which
may trigger a different action when selected by the user.
Track The path on a tape, disk or drum on which data are stored. On a disk
these paths are concentric circles; on a tape there are several tracks
parallel to the edge of the tape; on a drum there are bands of equal size
along the circumference of the drum.
Turnaround document A document which, after being output by the computer, can be used to
record data.
Two’s complement
document
A method of representing numbers in which the computer does not
perform subtraction in the normal way but inverts digits to be subtracted
and adds to them.
Up-load Process of reading data from a user’s computer storage and sending it to
another computer via communication channels.
URL Each page on the World Wide Web has a unique address called the Uniform
Resource Locator (URL).
Usenet Short for Users Network is the largest discussion forum in the world. Usenet
allows people with common interest to communicate with one another.
VoIP Acronym for Voice over Internet Protocol. It is a protocol which governs the
transmission of voice over the Internet. VoIP is often used abstractly to refer to
the actual transmission of voice (rather than the protocol implementing it).
VoIP is also known as IP Telephony.
Validation A checking process in a program which is aimed at finding out if data is
genuine. Validation should be carried out on any data that is entered
from the keyboard, even when this is simply a Y or N response.
World Wide Web (WWW) The World Wide Web commonly referred to as the ‘Web’, is a graphical easy-touse system of inter-linked files on the Internet. Vast amounts of information can
be obtained through the use of the WWW.
Web page A document on the World Wide Web, consisting of an HTML file and any
related files for scripts and graphics and often hyperlinked to other Web pages.
Web site Set of interconnected Web pages, usually including a home page, generally located on
the same server, and prepared and maintained as a collection of information by
a person, group, or organization.
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 56
Web browser A web browser is a programme that allows users to view and explore information
on the World Wide Web. Examples of popular browsers are: Microsoft Internet
Explorer and Mozilla Firefox.
Web Server A computer that delivers (serves up) Web pages. When a request is made to
access a web site, the request is sent to the web server. The server then fetches the
page and sends it to your browser.
Western Zone Office
04/06/2008
CXC 30/G/SYLL 08 57