CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate
CSEC
MATHEMATICS
SYLLABUS
Effective for examinations from May/June 2010
CXC 05/G/SYLL 08
Published in Jamaica
© 2010, Caribbean Examinations Council
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form, or by any means electronic, photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior
permission of the author or publisher.
Correspondence related to the syllabus should be addressed to:
The Pro-Registrar
Caribbean Examinations Council
Caenwood Centre
37 Arnold Road, Kingston 5, Jamaica, W.I.
Telephone: (876) 630-5200
Facsimile Number: (876) 967-4972
E-mail address: cxcwzo@cxc.org
Website: www.cxc.org
Copyright © 2008, by Caribbean Examinations Council
The Garrison, St Michael BB11158, Barbados
 CXC 05/OSYLL 00
 Contents
RATIONALE........................................................................................................................................... 1
AIMS. ....................................................................................................................................................... 1
ORGANISATION OF THE SYLLABUS. ............................................................................................. 2
FORMAT OF THE EXAMINATIONS ................................................................................................ 2
CERTIFICATION AND PROFILE DIMENSIONS............................................................................... 4
REGULATIONS FOR PRIVATE CANDIDATES............................................................................... 5
REGULATIONS FOR RE-SIT CANDIDATES.................................................................................... 5
SYMBOLS USED ON THE EXAMINATION PAPERS ...................................................................... 5
FORMULAE AND TABLES PROVIDED IN THE EXAMINATION ............................................... 9
USE OF ELECTRONIC CALCULATORS.......................................................................................... 10
SECTION 1 - COMPUTATION............................................................................................................ 11
SECTION 2 - NUMBER THEORY. ...................................................................................................... 13
SECTION 3 - CONSUMER ARITHMETIC......................................................................................... 15
SECTION 4 - SETS ................................................................................................................................. 17
SECTION 5 - MEASUREMENT............................................................................................................ 18
SECTION 6 - STATISTICS .................................................................................................................... 20
SECTION 7 - ALGEBRA........................................................................................................................ 22
SECTION 8 - RELATIONS, FUNCTIONS AND GRAPHS............................................................... 24
SECTION 9 - GEOMETRY AND TRIGONOMETRY........................................................................ 28
SECTION 10 - VECTORS AND MATRICES ...................................................................................... 32
RECOMMENDED TEXTS ...................................................................................................................... 34
GLOSSARY ............................................................................................................................................. 35
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 2
This document CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 replaces the syllabus CXC 05/O/SYLL 01
issued in 2001.
Please note that the syllabus has been revised and amendments are indicated by
italics and vertical lines.
First Published in 1977
Revised in 1981
Revised in 1985
Revised in 1992
Revised in 2001
Revised in 2008
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 2
 Mathematics Syllabus
♦ RATIONALE
The guiding principles of the Mathematics syllabus direct that Mathematics as taught in Caribbean schools
should be relevant to the existing and anticipated needs of Caribbean society, related to the abilities and interests of
Caribbean students and aligned with the philosophy of the educational system. These principles focus attention on
the use of Mathematics as a problem solving tool, as well as on some of the fundamental concepts which
help to unify Mathematics as a body of knowledge. The syllabus explains general and unifying concepts
that facilitate the study of Mathematics as a coherent subject rather than as a set of unrelated topics.
Every citizen needs basic computational skills (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) and the
ability to use these mentally to solve everyday problems. All citizens should recognise the importance of
accuracy in computation as the foundation for deductions and decisions based on the results. In addition,
the citizen should have, where possible, a choice of mathematical techniques to be applied in a variety of
situations. A ‘range of mathematical techniques’ is therefore, specified in recognition of the need to
accommodate different levels of ability. Citizens need to use Mathematics in many forms of decisionmaking: shopping, paying bills, budgeting and for the achievement of personal goals, critically evaluating
advertisements, taxation, investing, commercial activities, banking, working with and using current
technologies, measurements and understanding data in the media. Improving efficiency and skills in these
matters will be beneficial to the community as well as to the individual.
The syllabus seeks to provide for the needs of specific mathematical techniques in the future careers of
students, for example, in agriculture and in commercial and technical fields. By the end of the normal
secondary school course, students should appreciate that the various branches of Mathematics are not
rigidly segregated and that the approach to the solution of any problem is not necessarily unique.
This syllabus will contribute to the development of the Ideal Caribbean Person as articulated by the CARICOM Heads
of Government in the following areas: “demonstrate multiple literacies, independent and critical thinking and innovative
application of science and technology to problem solving. Such a person should also demonstrate a positive work attitude
and value and display creative imagination and entrepreneurship”. In keeping with the UNESCO Pillars of Learning,
on completion of this course the study, students will learn to do, learn to be and learn to transform themselves and
society.
♦ AIMS
This syllabus aims to:
1. help students appreciate the use of mathematics as a form of communication;
2. help students acquire a range of mathematical techniques and skills and to foster and maintain the
awareness of the importance of accuracy;
3. make Mathematics relevant to the interests and experiences of students by helping them to recognise
Mathematics in their environment;
4. cultivate the ability to apply mathematical knowledge to the solution of problems which are
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 1
meaningful to students as citizens;
5. help students cultivate the ability to think logically and critically;
6. help students develop positive attitudes, such as open-mindedness, self-reliance, persistence and a
spirit of enquiry;
7. prepare students for the use of Mathematics in further studies;
8. help students develop an appreciation of the wide application of Mathematics and its influence in
the development and advancement of civilisation;
9. help students become increasingly aware of the unifying structure of Mathematics.
♦ ORGANISATION OF THE SYLLABUS
The syllabus is arranged as a set of topics, and each topic is defined by its specific objectives and content. It is
expected that students would be able to master the specific objectives and related content after pursuing a
course in Mathematics over five years of secondary schooling.
The design allows for a Core which contains selected mathematical skills, knowledge and abilities necessary
for any citizen in our contemporary society as well as objectives to meet the needs of those who will be:
(a) pursuing careers as agriculturalists, engineers, scientists, economists;
(b) proceeding to study Mathematics at an advanced level;
(c) engaged in the business and commercial world.
The Examination will also comprise an Optional section which will be defined by additional specific
objectives.
♦ FORMAT OF THE EXAMINATIONS
The examination will consist of two papers: Paper 01, an objective type paper based on the Core Objectives
and Paper 02, an essay or problem solving type paper based on both the Core and Optional Objectives.
Paper 01
(1 hour 30 minutes)
The Paper will consist of 60 multiple-choice items, sampling the Core
as follows:
Sections No. of items
Computation 6
Number Theory 4
Consumer Arithmetic 8
Sets 4
Measurement 8
Statistics 6
Algebra 9
Relations, Functions and Graphs 6
Geometry and Trigonometry 9
Total 60
Each item will be allocated one mark.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 2
Paper 02 The Paper consists of two sections.
(2 hours and 40 minutes)
Section I: 90 marks
The section will consist of 8 compulsory structured and problem-solving type
questions based on the Core.
The marks allocated to the topics are:
Sections No. of marks
Sets 5
Consumer Arithmetic and Computation 10
Measurement
10
Statistics
10
Algebra
15
Relations, Functions and Graphs 10
Geometry and Trigonometry
20
*Combination question/ investigation 10
Total
90
* Combination question/investigation may be set on any combination of objectives in the
Core including Number Theory.
Section II: 30 marks
This section will consist of 3 structured or problem-solving questions based
mainly on the Optional Objectives of the syllabus. There will be 1 question
from each of the Sections Algebra and Relations, Functions and Graphs;
Measurement and Geometry and Trigonometry; and Vectors and Matrices.
Candidates will be required to answer any two questions. Each question will
be allocated 15 marks.
The optional questions will be set as follows:
ALGEBRA AND RELATIONS, FUNCTIONS AND GRAPHS
The question in this section may be set on:
Algebra
Optional Specific Objective 17 or any of the other Specific Objectives in Algebra.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 3
Relations, Functions and Graphs
Optional Specific Objectives 15, 22, 23, 24, 25 or any of the other Specific Objectives in Relations,
Functions and Graphs.
MEASUREMENT AND GEOMETRY AND TRIGONOMETRY
The question in this section may be set on:
Measurement
Optional Specific Objectives 5, 6 or any of the other Specific Objectives in Measurement.
Geometry and Trigonometry
Optional Specific Objective 20 or any of the other Specific Objectives in Geometry and Trigonometry.
VECTORS AND MATRICES
The question in this section may be set on:
Optional Specific Objectives 5, 11, 12, 13 or any of the other Specific Objectives in Vectors and Matrices.
♦ CERTIFICATION AND PROFILE DIMENSIONS
The subject will be examined for certification at the General Proficiency.
In each paper, items and questions will be classified, according to the kind of cognitive demand made, as
follows:
Knowledge Items that require the recall of rules, procedures, definitions and facts, that is,
items characterised by rote memory as well as simple computations, computation
in measurements, constructions and drawings.
Comprehension Items that require algorithmic thinking that involves translation from one
mathematical mode to another. Use of algorithms and the application of these
algorithms to familiar problem situations.
Reasoning Items that require:
(i) translation of non-routine problems into mathematical symbols and then
choosing suitable algorithms to solve the problems;
(ii) combination of two or more algorithms to solve problems;
(iii) use of an algorithm or part of an algorithm, in a reverse order, to solve a
problem;
(iv) the making of inferences and generalisations from given data;
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 4
(v) justification of results or statement;
(vi) analyzing and synthesising.
Candidates’ performance will be reported under Knowledge, Comprehension and Reasoning that are
roughly defined in terms of the three types of demand.
WEIGHTING OF PAPER AND PROFILE DIMENSIONS
PROFILES PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
Knowledge 18 36 54
Comprehension 24 48 72
Reasoning 18 36 54
Total 60 120 180
♦ REGULATIONS FOR PRIVATE CANDIDATES
Candidates who are registered privately will be required to sit Paper 01 and Paper 02. Detailed information
on Papers 01 and 02 is given on pages 2 – 4 of this syllabus.
Private candidates must be entered through institutions recognised by the Council.
♦ REGULATIONS FOR RESIT CANDIDATES
Resit candidates will be required to sit Paper 01 and Paper 02. Detailed information on Paper 01 and 02 is
given on pages 2 - 4 of this syllabus.
Resit candidates must be entered through a school or other approved educational institution.
♦ SYMBOLS USED ON THE EXAMINATION PAPERS
The symbols shown below will be used on examination papers. Candidates, however, may make use of any
symbol or nomenclature provided that such use is consistent and understandable in the given context.
Measurement will be given in S I Units.
SYMBOL DEFINITION
Sets
U universal set
{ } or ф the null (empty) set
⊂ a subset of
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 5
A' complement of set A
{x: . . . } the set of all x such that . . .
Relations and Functions and Graphs
y ∝ xn y varies as xn
gf(x) g[f(x)]
g2
(x) g[g(x)]
 0 1 2 3 4 {x : 1 ≤ x ≤3}

 0 1 2 3 4 {x : 1 < x < 3}
Number Theory
W the set of whole numbers
ℕ the set of natural (counting) numbers
ℤ the sets of integers
Q the set of rational numbers
R the set of real numbers
5.432 432 432 . . .
9.87212121 . . .
Measurement
05:00 h. 5:00 a.m.
13:15 h. 1:15 p.m.
7mm ± 0.5 mm 7mm to the nearest millimetre
10 m/s or 10 ms-1 10 metres per second
5.4
3
2

9. 872
1

Z+ - positive integers
Z-
 - negative integers
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 6
Geometry
For transformations these symbols will be used.
M reflection
Rθ rotation through θo
T translation
G glide reflection
E enlargement
MRθ rotation through θ followed by reflection
∡, ∠, ∧ angle
≡ is congruent to
 A B line AB
A B ray AB
line segment AB
 A B
Vectors and Matrices
a or a vector a
AB vector AB
AB  magnitude of vector AB
If or is the matrix X
then is the determinant of X, written X  or det X.
A-1 inverse of the matrix A








c d
a b


 


c d
a b
c d
a b
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 7
I identity matrix
O zero matrix
Other Symbols
= is equal to or equals
≥ is greater than or equal to
≤ is less than or equal to
~ is approximately equal to
⇒ implies
A ⇒ B if A, then B
A ⇔ B If A, then B
and
If B, then A
A is equivalent to B


 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 8
♦ FORMULAE AND TABLES PROVIDED IN THE EXAMINATION
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 9
USE OF ELECTRONIC CALCULATORS
Candidates are expected to have an electronic calculator and are encouraged to use such a calculator in
Paper 02.
Guidelines for the use of electronic calculators are listed below.
1. Silent, electronic hand-held calculators may be used.
2. Calculators should be battery or solar powered.
3. Candidates are responsible for ensuring that calculators are in working condition.
4. Candidates are permitted to bring a set of spare batteries in the examination room.
5. No compensation will be given to candidates because of faulty calculators.
6. No help or advice is permitted on the use or repair of calculators during the examination.
7. Sharing calculators is not permitted in the examination room.
8. Instruction manuals, and external storage media (for example, card, tape, disk, smartcard or plug-in
modules) are not permitted in the examination room.
9. Calculators with graphical display, data bank, dictionary or language translation are not allowed.
10. Calculators that have the capability of communication with any agency in or outside of the
examination room are prohibited.
♦
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 10
♦ SECTION 1 - COMPUTATION
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. demonstrate an understanding of place value;
2. demonstrate computational skills;
3. be aware of the importance of accuracy in computation;
4. appreciate the need for numeracy in everyday life;
5. demonstrate the ability to make estimates fit for purpose.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. perform computation using any
of the four basic operations with
real numbers;
Addition, multiplication, subtraction and division of whole
numbers, fractions and decimals.
2. convert among fractions,
percentages and decimals;
Conversion of fractions to decimals and percentages, conversion
of decimal to fractions and percentages, conversion of
percentages to decimals and fractions.
3. convert from one set of units to
another;
Conversion using conversion scales, converting within the metric
scales, 12-hour and 24-hour clock, currency conversion.
4. express a value to a given
number of:
(a) significant figures;
(b) decimal places;
1, 2 or 3 significant figures.
1, 2 or 3 decimal places.
5. write any rational number in
standard form;
Scientific notation.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 11
COMPUTATION (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
6. calculate any fraction or
percentage of a given quantity;
Calculating fractions and percentages of a whole.
7. express one quantity as a
fraction or percentage of
another;
Comparing two quantities using fractions and percentages.
8. compare two quantities using
ratios;
Ratio and proportion.
9. divide a quantity in a given
ratio;
Ratio and proportion.
10. solve problems involving:
(a) fractions;
(b) decimals;
(c) percentages;
(d) ratio, rates and
proportions;
(e) arithmetic mean.

 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 12
♦ SECTION 2 - NUMBER THEORY
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. understand and appreciate the decimal numeration system;
2. appreciate the development of different numeration systems;
3. demonstrate the ability to use rational approximations of real numbers;
4. demonstrate the ability to use number properties to solve problems;
5. develop the ability to use patterns, trends and investigative skills.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. distinguish among sets of
numbers;
Set of numbers:
natural numbers {1, 2, 3, ...}, whole numbers
{0, 1, 2, 3, ...}, integers {...-2, -1, 0, 1, 2, ...}, rational
numbers (
q
p :p and q are integers, q ≠ 0), irrational
numbers (numbers that cannot be expressed as
terminating or recurring decimals, for example, numbers
such as π and √2), the real numbers (the union of
rational and irrational numbers); sequences of numbers
that have a recognisable pattern; factors and multiples;
square numbers; even numbers; odd numbers; prime numbers;
composite numbers.
2. order a set of real numbers;
3. generate a term of a sequence
given a rule;
Sequences of numbers that have a recognisable pattern.
4. derive an appropriate rule given the
terms of a sequence;
Sequences of numbers that have a recognisable pattern.
5. identify a given set of numbers
as a subset of another set;
Inclusion relations, for example, N ⊂ W ⊂ Z ⊂ Q ⊂ R.
6. list the set of factors or a set of
multiples of a given positive
integer;
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 13
NUMBER THEORY (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
7. compute the H.C.F. or L.C.M.
of two or more positive
integers;
8. state the value of a digit in a
numeral in base n, where n≤10;
Place value and face value of numbers 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and
10 in base.
9. use properties of numbers and
operations in computational
tasks;
Additive and multipicative identities and inverses, concept of
closure, properties of operations such as commutativity,
distributivity and associativity, order of operations in problems
with mixed operations.
10. solve problems involving concepts
in number theory.










 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 14
♦ SECTION 3 - CONSUMER ARITHMETIC
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. develop the ability to perform the calculations required in normal business transactions, and in
computing their own budgets;
2. appreciate the need for both accuracy and speed in calculations;
3. appreciate the advantages and disadvantages of different ways of investing money;
4. appreciate that business arithmetic is indispensable in everyday life;
5. demonstrate the ability to use concepts in consumer arithmetic to describe, model and solve real-world problems.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. calculate discount, sales tax,
profit or loss;
2. express a profit, loss, discount,
markup and purchase tax, as a
percentage of some value;
3. solve problems involving
marked price (or selling price),
cost price, percentage profit,
loss or discount;
4. solve problems involving
payments by installments as in
the case of hire purchase and
mortgages;
5. solve problems involving simple
interest,
Principal, time, rate, amount.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 15
CONSUMER ARITHMETIC (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
6. solve problems involving
compound interest,
appreciation, and depreciation;
Principal, time, rate, amount (not more than 3 periods).
7. solve problems involving
measures and money;
Include exchange rate.
8. solve problems involving:
(a) rates and taxes;
(b) utilities;
(c) invoices and shopping
bills;
(d) salaries and wages;
(e) insurance and
investments.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 16
♦ SECTION 4 - SETS
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. demonstrate the ability to communicate using set language and concepts;
2. demonstrate the ability to reason logically;
3. appreciate the importance and utility of sets in analyzing and solving real-world problems.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. explain concepts relating to sets; Examples and non-examples of sets, description of sets using
words, membership of a set, cardinality of a set, finite and
infinite sets, universal set, empty set, complement of a set,
subsets.
2. represent a set in various forms; Listing elements, for example, the set of natural numbers 1,2
and 3.
Set builder notation, for example, {x: 0‹x‹4 where x ∈ N}.
Symbolic representation, for example, A={1,2,3}.
3. describe relationships among sets
using set notation and symbols;
Universal, complement, subsets, equal and equivalent sets,
intersection, disjoint sets and union of sets.
4. list subsets of a given set; Number of subsets of a set with n elements.
5. determine elements in intersections,
unions and complements of sets;
Intersection and union of not more than three sets.
Apply the result n(A B) = n(A) + n(B) − n(A B).
6. construct Venn diagrams to
represent relationships among sets;
Not more than 4 sets including the universal set.
7. solve problems involving the use of
Venn diagrams;
8. solve problems in Number Theory,
Algebra and Geometry using
concepts in Set Theory.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 17
♦ SECTION 5 - MEASUREMENT
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. understand that the attributes of an object can be quantified using measurement;
2. appreciate that all measurements are approximate and that the relative accuracy of a measurement is
dependent on the measuring instrument and the measurement process;
3. demonstrate the ability to use concepts in measurement to model and solve real-world problems.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. calculate the perimeter of a
polygon, a circle, and a
combination of polygons and
circles;
Measures of length, perimeters of polygons and circles.
2. calculate the length of an arc of
a circle;
3. calculate the area of polygons, a
circle and any combination of
these;
Rectangle, square, parallelogram, trapezium, rhombus and
circle.
4. calculate the area of a sector of a
circle;
5. calculate the area of a triangle
given two sides and the
included angle;
Optional Specific Objective.
Area of ∆ = ½ abSinC.

6. calculate the area of a segment
of a circle;
Optional Specific Objective.

7. estimate the area of irregularly
shaped plane figures;


8. calculate the surface area of
solids;
Prism, cylinder, cone, sphere, cube and cuboid.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 18
MEASUREMENT (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
9. calculate the volume of solids; Prism, cylinder, pyramid, cone, sphere, cube and cuboid.
10. convert units of length, area,
capacity, time and speed;
11. use the appropriate SI unit of
measure for area, volume, mass,
temperature and time (24-hour
clock) and other derived
quantities;
12. solve problems involving time,
distance and speed;
13. estimate the margin of error for
a given measurement;
Sources of error.
Maximum and minimum measurements.
14. use maps and scale drawings to
determine distances and areas;
15. solve problems involving
measurement.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 19
♦ SECTION 6 - STATISTICS
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. appreciate the advantages and disadvantages of the various ways of presenting and representing data;
2. appreciate the necessity for taking precautions in collecting, analyzing and interpreting statistical data
and making inferences;
3. demonstrate the ability to use concepts in statistics and probability to describe, model and solve real-world
problems.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. differentiate between types of data; Discrete and continuous variables.
Ungrouped and grouped data.
2. construct a frequency table for a
given set of data;
Ungrouped and grouped data.
3. determine class features for a
given set of data;
Class interval, class boundaries, class limits, class
midpoint, class width.
4. construct statistical diagrams; Pie charts, bar charts, line graphs, histograms and
frequency polygons.
5. interpret statistical diagrams; Pie charts, bar charts, line graphs, histograms and
frequency polygons.
6. determine measures of central
tendency for raw, ungrouped
and grouped data;
Mean, median and mode.
7. determine when it is most
appropriate to use the mean,
median and mode as the
average for a set of data;
Mean, median and mode as measures of central
tendency.
8. determine the measures of
dispersion (spread) for raw,
ungrouped and grouped data;
Range, interquartile range and semi-interquartile range.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 20
STATISTICS (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
9. construct a cumulative frequency
table for ungrouped and
grouped data;
10. draw cumulative frequency
curve (Ogive);
Appropriate scales for axes.
Class boundaries as domain.
11. use statistical diagrams; Mean, mode, median, quartiles range, interquartile range,
semi-interquartile range.
12. determine the proportion or
percentage of the sample above
or below a given value from raw
data, table or cumulative
frequency curve;
13. identify the sample space for
sample experiment;
Set of all possible outcomes.
14. determine experimental and
theoretical probabilities of
events;
15. make inference(s) from
statistics.
Raw data, tables, diagrams.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 21
♦ SECTION 7 - ALGEBRA
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. appreciate the use of algebra as a language and a form of communication;
2. appreciate the role of symbols and algebraic techniques in solving problems in mathematics and related fields;
3. demonstrate the ability to reason with abstract entities.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. use symbols to represent
numbers, operations, variables
and relations;
Symbolic representation.
2. translate statements expressed
algebraically into verbal phrases;
3. perform arithmetic operations
involving directed numbers;
4. perform the four basic
operations with algebraic
expressions;
5. substitute numbers for
algebraic symbols in simple
algebraic expressions;
6. perform binary operations (other
than the four basic ones);
7. apply the distributive law to
factorise or expand algebraic
expressions;
For example, x(a+b) = xa+xb and (a+b)(x+y) =
(a+b)x + (a+b)y = ax+bx+ay+by.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 22
ALGEBRA (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
8. simplify algebraic fractions;
9. use the laws of indices to
manipulate expressions with
integral indices;
10. solve linear equations in one
unknown;
11. solve simultaneous linear
equations, in two unknowns,
algebraically;
12. solve a simple linear inequality
in one unknown;
13. change the subject of formulae; Including those involving roots and powers.
14. factorise algebraic expressions; a2 - b2 ; 2 2 a ± 2ab + b
ax + bx + ay + by
ax2 + bx + c where a, b, and c are integers and a≠0
15. solve quadratic equations;
16. solve word problems; Linear equation, Linear inequalities, two simultaneous
linear equations, quadratic equations.
17. solve a pair of equations in two
variables when one equation is
quadratic or non-linear and the
other linear;
Optional Specific Objective.
18. prove two algebraic expressions
to be identical;
19. represent direct and indirect
variation symbolically;
20. solve problems involving direct
variation and inverse variation.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 23
SECTION 8 - RELATIONS, FUNCTIONS AND GRAPHS
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. appreciate the importance of relations in Mathematics;
2. appreciate that many mathematical relations may be represented in symbolic form, tabular or
pictorial form;
3. appreciate the usefulness of concepts in relations, functions and graphs to solve real-world problems.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. explain concepts associated with
relations;
 Concept of a relation, types of relation, examples and nonexamples of relations, domain, range, image, co-domain.

2. represent a relation in various
ways;
 Set of ordered pairs, arrow diagrams, graphically,
algebraically.
3. state the characteristics that
define a function;
 Concept of a function, examples and non-examples of
functions.

4. use functional notation; For example f : x  x2
; or f(x) = x2 as well as y = f(x) for
given domains.

5. distinguish between a relation and
a function;
 Ordered pairs, arrow diagram, graphically (vertical line
test).

6. draw and interpret graphs of
linear functions;
 Concept of linear function, types of linear function
(y = c; x = k; y = mx + c; where m, c and k are real
numbers).

7. determine the intercepts of the
graph of linear functions;
 x-intercepts and y-intercepts, graphically and algebraically.

8. determine the gradient of a straight
line;
Concept of slope.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 24
RELATIONS, FUNCTIONS AND GRAPHS (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
9. determine the equation of a
straight line;
The graph of the line.
The co-ordinates of two points on the line.
The gradient and one point on the line.
One point on the line and its relationship to another line.
10. solve problems involving the
gradient of parallel and
perpendicular lines;

11. determine from co-ordinates on a
line segment:
 (a) the length;
 (b) the co-ordinates of the
midpoint;
The concept of magnitude or length, concept of midpoint.
12. solve graphically a system of two
linear equations in two
variables;
13. represent the solution of linear
inequalities in one variable
using:
(a) set notation;
(b) the number line;
(c) graph;
14. draw a graph to represent a
linear inequality in two
variables;





 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 25
RELATIONS, FUNCTIONS AND GRAPHS (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
15. use linear programming
techniques to solve problems
involving two variables;
Optional Specific Objective.
16. derive composite functions; Composite function, for example, fg, f2 given f and g.
Non-commutativity of composite functions (fg≠gf).
17. state the relationship between a
function and its inverse;
The concept of the inverse of a function.

18. derive the inverse of a function; f
-1
, (fg)-1

19. evaluate f(a), f-1
(a), fg(a),
 (fg)-1
(a);
Where a ∈ℜ.

20. use the relationship
 (fg)-1
= g-1 f
-1
;

The concept of the inverse of a function, determining the inverse
of a given function.

21. draw and interpret graphs of a
quadratic function to determine:

(a) the elements of the
domain that have a given
image;
(b) the image of a given
element in the domain;
(c) the maximum or
minimum value of the
function;
(d) the equation of the axis of
symmetry;

Concepts of gradient of a curve at a point, tangent, turning
point. Roots of the equation.

 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 26
RELATIONS, FUNCTIONS AND GRAPHS (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
draw and interpret graphs of a quadratic
function to determine: (cont’d)
(e) the interval of the domain
for which the elements of
the range may be greater
than or less than a given
point;
(f) an estimate of the value
of the gradient at a given
point;
(g) intercepts of the function;
22. determine the axis of symmetry,
maximum or minimum value
of a quadratic function
expressed in the form
a(x + h)2 + k;
Optional Specific Objective.

23. sketch graph of quadratic
function expressed in the form
a(x+h)2 + k and determine
number of roots;
Optional Specific Objective.
24. draw and interpret the graphs of
other non-linear functions;
Optional Specific Objective.
y=axn where n = -1,-2 and +3.
25. draw and interpret distance-time
graphs and speed-time graphs
(straight line only) to determine:
(a) distance;
(b) time;
(c) speed;
(d) magnitude of acceleration.
Optional Specific Objective.

 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 27
♦ SECTION 9 - GEOMETRY AND TRIGONOMETRY
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. appreciate the notion of space as a set of points with subsets of that set (space) having properties
related to other mathematical systems;
2. understand the properties and relationship among geometrical objects;
3. understand the properties of transformations;
4. demonstrate the ability to use geometrical concepts to model and solve real world problems;
5. appreciate the power of trigonometrical methods in solving authentic problems.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. explain concepts relating to
geometry;
Point, line, parallel lines, intersecting lines and
perpendicular lines, line segment, ray, curve, plane, angle
(acute, obtuse, reflex, right angle, straight angle), face,
edge, vertex.
2. draw and measure angles and
line segments accurately using
appropriate geometrical
instruments;
3. construct lines, angles, and
polygons using appropriate
geometrical instruments;
Parallel and perpendicular lines.
Triangles, quadrilaterals, regular and irregular polygons.
Angles to be constructed include 30, 45, 60, 90, 120.
4. identify the type(s) of symmetry
possessed by a given plane
figure;
Line(s) of symmetry, rotational symmetry, order of
rotational symmetry.
5. solve geometric problems using
properties of:
(a) lines, angles, and
polygons;
(b) circles;
Vertically opposite angles, alternate angles, adjacent
angles, corresponding angles, co-interior angles, angles at
a point, complementary angles, supplementary angles.
Parallel lines and transversals. Equilateral, right, and
isosceles triangles.
Square, rectangle, rhombus, kite, parallelogram,
trapezium.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 28
GEOMETRY AND TRIGONOMETRY (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
solve geometric problems using
properties of: (cont’d)
(c) congruent triangles;
(d) similar figures;
(e) faces, edges and
vertices of solids;
(f) classes of solids; Prisms, pyramids, cylinders, cones, sphere.
6. represent translations in the
plane using vectors;
Column matrix notation 







y
x .
7. determine and represent the
location of :
(a) the image of an object ;
(b) an object given the
image under a
transformation;
A translation in the plane; a reflection in a line in that
plane; a rotation about a point (the centre of rotation) in
that plane; an enlargement or reduction in that plane.
8. identify the relationship
between an object and its image
in the plane after a geometric
transformation;
Similarity; Congruency.
9. describe a transformation given
an object and its image;
A translation in the plane; a reflection in a line in that
plane; a rotation about a point (the centre of rotation)
through an angle in the plane; an enlargement or reduction
in that plane about a center.
10. locate the image of a set of
points under a combination of
transformations;
Combination of any two of enlargement/reduction,
translation, rotation, reflection, glide reflection.
11. state the relations between an
object and its image as the
result of a combination of two
transformations;
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 29
GEOMETRY AND TRIGONOMETRY (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
12. use Pythagoras’ theorem to
solve problems;
13. determine the trigonometric
ratios of acute angles in a rightangled triangle;
14. use trigonometric ratios in the
solution of right angledtriangles;
Practical geometry and scale drawing, bearing.
15. use trigonometric ratios to solve
problems based on measures in
the physical world;
Heights and distances; angles of elevation and depression.
16. use the sine and cosine rules in
the solution of problems
involving triangles;
17. represent the relative position of
two points given the bearing of
one point with respect to the
other;
18. determine the bearing of one
point relative to another point
given the position of the points.
19. solve problems involving
bearings;
20. solve practical problems
involving heights and distances
in three dimensional situations;
Optional Specific Objective.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 30
GEOMETRY AND TRIGONOMETRY (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
21. solve geometric problems using
properties of circles and circle
theorems.
The angle which an arc of a circle subtends at the centre of a
circle is twice the angle it subtends at any point on the
remaining part of the circumference.
The angle in a semicircle is a right angle.
Angles in the same segment of a circle and subtended by the
same arc are equal.
The opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral are supplementary.
The exterior angle of a cyclic quadrilateral is equal to the
interior opposite angle.
A tangent of a circle is perpendicular to the radius of that circle
at the point of contact.
The lengths of two tangents from an external point to the points
of contact on the circle are equal.
The angle between a tangent to a circle and a chord through the
point of contact is equal to the angle in the alternate segment.
The line joining the centre of a circle to the midpoint of a chord
is perpendicular to the chord.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 31
♦ SECTION 10 - VECTORS AND MATRICES
GENERAL OBJECTIVES
On completion of this Section, students should:
1. demonstrate the ability to use vector notation and concepts to model and solve real-world problems;
2. develop awareness of the existence of certain mathematical objects, such as matrices, that do not satisfy the
same rules of operation as the real number system;
3. demonstrate how matrices can be used to represent certain types of linear transformation in the
plane.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
1. explain concepts associated with
vectors;
Concept of a vector, magnitude, direction, line segment,
scalar.
2. combine vectors; Triangle law, or parallelogram laws
2x1 Column matrices,
for example, 







+
+ =







+







b d
a c
d
c
b
a
Vector algebra.
3. express a point P(a,b) as a position
vector
 






 = →
b
a
OP
 where O is the origin (0, 0);
Displacement and position vectors; co-ordinates.
4. determine the magnitude of a
vector;
Including unit vectors.
5. use vectors to solve problems in
Geometry;
Collinearity, parallel.
6. explain concepts associated with
matrices;
Concept of a matrix, row, column, order, types of matrices,
practical use.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 32
VECTORS AND MATRICES (cont’d)
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES CONTENT
Students should be able to:
7. perform addition, subtraction
and multiplication of matrices
and multiplication of matrices
by a scalar;
Non-commutativity of matrix multiplication.
8. evaluate the determinant of a
‘2 x 2’ matrix;
9. solve problems involving a ‘2 x
2’ singular matrix;
10. obtain the inverse of a nonsingular ‘2 x 2’ matrix;
Determinant and adjoint of a matrix.
11. determine a ‘2 x 2’ matrix
associated with specified
transformations;
12. determine a ‘2 x 2’ matrix
representation of the single
transformation which is
equivalent to the composition
of two linear transformations in
a plane (where the origin
remains fixed);
13. use matrices to solve simple
problems in Arithmetic, Algebra
and Geometry .
Use of matrices to solve linear simultaneous equations.
(Matrices of order greater than ‘3 x 3’ will not be set.)
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 33
♦ RECOMMENDED TEXTS
Buckwell, G., Solomon, R., and Chung
Harris, T.
CXC Mathematics for Today 1, Oxford: Macmillan
Education, 2005.
Chandler, S., Smith, E., Ali, F., Layne,
C. and Mothersill, A.
Mathematics for CSEC, United Kingdom: Nelson Thorne
Limited, 2008.
Golberg, N. Mathematics for the Caribbean 4, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2006.
Greer and Layne Certificate Mathematics, A Revision Course for the Caribbean,
United Kingdom: Nelson Thorness Limited, 2001.
Layne, Ali, Bostock, Chandler,
Shepherd and Ali.
STP Caribbean Mathematics for CXC Book 4, United
Kingdom: Nelson Thorness Limited, 2005.
Toolsie, R. Mathematics, A Complete Course Volume 1, Caribbean
Educational Publisher Limited, 2006.
Toolsie, R. Mathematics, A Complete Course Volume 2, Caribbean
Educational Publisher Limited, 2006.
Websites
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/
http://plus.maths.org/
http://nrich.maths.org/public/
http://mathforum.org/
http://www.ies.co.jp/math/java/
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 34
♦ GLOSSARY
WORDS MEANING
Acute Angle An angle whose measure is less than 90 degrees.
Adjacent Angles Two angles that share a ray, thereby being directly next to each
other.
Algorithm An organised procedure for performing a given type of
calculation or solving a given type of problem. An example is
long division.
Alternate Exterior Angles Angles located outside a set of parallel lines and on opposite
sides of the transversal.
Alternate Interior Angles Angles located inside a set of parallel lines and on opposite
sides of the transversal.
Angle Bisector A ray that divides an angle into two congruent angles.
Arithmetic Mean See mean.
Arithmetic Sequence A sequence of elements, a1, a2, a3,….., such that the difference of
successive terms is a constant ai+1 - ai = k; for example, the
sequence {2, 5, 8, 11, 14, …} where the common difference is 3.
Associative Property This property applies both to multiplication and addition and
states that you can group several numbers that are being added
or multiplied (not both) in any way and yield the same value.
In mathematical terms, for all real numbers a, b, and c,
(a+b)+c=a+(b+c) or (ab)c=a(bc).
Asymptotes Straight lines that have the property of becoming and staying
arbitrarily close to the curve as the distance from the origin
increases to infinity. For example, the x-axis is the only
asymptote to the graph of sin (x)/x.
Bar Graph A diagram showing a system of connections or interrelations
between two or more things by using bars.
Base Depth of the Triangular
Prism
The perpendicular distance from the base of the triangle to the
top of the triangle.
Base of Triangular Prism The triangular end of the prism.
Bimodal Having two modes, which are the most frequently occurring
number in a list.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 35
WORDS MEANING
Binomial In algebra, an expression consisting of the sum or difference of
two monomials (see definition of monomial, such as 4a-8b.
Class Interval In plotting a histogram, one starts by dividing the range of all
values into non-overlapping intervals, called class intervals, in
such a way that every piece of data is contained in some class
interval.
Coefficients The constant multiplicative factor of a mathematical object.
Objects include variables, vectors, functions, matrices etc. For
example, in the expression: 4d+5 2
t +3s, the 4, 5, and 3 are
coefficients for the variables d, t2
, and s respectively.
Commutative Property A binary operation * on a given set S is said to be commutative
if for every pair of elements a and b that are elements of S,
a * b = b * a. The operations of addition (+) and multiplication
(x) are commutative on the set of real numbers. This property
means that you can rearrange the order of the object being
added or reorder numbers being multiplied without changing
the value of the expression. In mathematical terms, for all real
numbers a and b, a+b=b+a and ab=ba.
Complementary Angles Two angles that have a sum of 90 degrees.
Congruent Two shapes in the plane or in space are congruent if there is a
rigid motion that identifies one with the other (see the
definition of rigid motion).
Conjecture A proposition which fits with established data but which has
not yet been verified or refuted. An educated guess or
hypothesis.
Continuous Graph In a graph, a continuous line with no breaks in it forms a
continuous graph.
Coordinate Plane A plane with a point selected as an origin, some length selected
as a unit of distance, and two perpendicular lines that intersect
at the origin, with positive and negative direction selected on
each line. Traditionally, the lines are called x (drawn from left
to right, with positive direction to the right of the origin) and y
(drawn form bottom to top, with positive direction upward of
the origin). Coordinates of a point are determined by the
distance of this point from the lines, and the signs of the
coordinates are determined by whether the point is in the
positive or in the negative direction from the origin.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 36
WORDS MEANING
Coordinates A unique ordered pair of numbers that identifies a point on the
coordinate plane. The first number in the ordered pair
identifies the position with regard to the horizontal (x-axis)
while the second number identifies the position relative to the
vertical (y-axis).
Coordinate System A rule of correspondence by which two or more quantities
locate points unambiguously and which satisfies the further
property that points unambiguously determine the quantities,
for example, the usual Cartesian coordinates x, y in the plane.
Corresponding Angles Two angles in the same relative position on two lines when
those lines are cut by a transversal.
Cosine Cos(q) is the x-coordinate of the point on the unit circle so that
the ray connecting the point with the origin makes a angle of q
with the positive x-axis. When q is an angle of a right triangle,
then Cos(q) is the ratio of the adjacent side with the
hypotenuse.
Decimal Number A fraction where the denominator is a power of ten and is
therefore expressed using a decimal point. For example, 0.37 is
the decimal equivalent of
100
37 .
Degrees A circle is measured in units called degrees. The entire circle is
360 degrees, half a circle is 180 degrees, and one quarter of a
circle is 90 degrees. The “L” shaped 90 degree circle forms what
is called a right angle. When examining circular objects, such
as spinners, the size of each segment in the circle can be
described in degrees.
Discontinuous Graph A line in a graph that is interrupted, or has breaks in it forms a
discontinuous graph.
Disjoint Events Two events are disjoint if they can’t both happen at the same
time (in other words, if they have no outcomes in common).
Equivalently, two events are disjoint if their intersection is the
empty set.
Distributive Property Summing two numbers and then multiplying by another
number yields the same value as multiplying both values by the
other value and then adding. In mathematical terms, for all
real numbers a, b, and c, a(b+c)=ab+ac.
Domain of the function f The set of numbers x for which f(x) is defined.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 37
WORDS MEANING
Element A member of or an object in a set.
Empty Set The empty set, Ø, is the set that has no members.
Equally Likely In probability, when there are the same chances for more than
one event to happen, the events are equally likely to occur. For
example, if someone flips a coin, the chances of getting heads or
tails are the same. There are equally likely chances of getting
heads or tails.
Estimate The best guess for an unknown quantity arrived at after
considering all the information given in a problem.
Event In probability, an event is an occurrence or the possibility of an
occurrence that is being investigated.
Expanded Form The expanded form of an algebraic expression is the equivalent
expression without parentheses. For example, the expanded
form of (a+b)2 is a2
+2ab+b2
.
Expected Value The amount that is predicted to be gained, using the calculation
for average expected payoff.
Experimental Probability The chances of something happening, based on repeated testing
and observing results. It is the ratio of the number of times an
event occurred to the number of times tested. For example, to
find the experimental probability of winning a game, one must
play the game many times, then divide by the number of games
won by the total number of games played.
Exponent The power to which a number of variable is raised (the
exponent may be any real number).
Exponential Function A function commonly used to study growth and decay. It has
the form y=ax with a positive.
Factors Any of two or more quantities that are multiplied together. In
the expression 3.712 x 11.315, the factors are 3.712 and
11.315.
Frequency The number of items occurring in a given category.
Function A correspondence in which values of one variable determine
the values of another.
Graph A visual representation of data that displays the relationship
among variables, usually cast along x and y axes.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 38
WORDS MEANING
Histogram A vertical block graph with no spaces between the blocks. It is
used to represent frequency data in statistics.
Hypotenuse The side of the triangle that is opposite the right angle.
Identity A number that when an operation is applied to a given number
yields that given number. For multiplication, the identity is one
and for addition the identity is zero.
Inequality A relationship between two quantities indicating that one is
strictly less than or less than or equal to the other.
Integers The set consisting of the positive and negative whole numbers
and zero, for example, {… -2, -1, 0, 1, 2,…}.
Irrational Number A number that cannot be represented as an exact ratio of two
integers. For example, the square root of 2 or π .
Input The number or value that is entered, for example, into a
function machine. The number that goes into the machine is
the input.
Intercept See x-intercept or y-intercept.
Intersection of Sets The intersection of two or more sets is the set of elements that
all the sets have in common, in other words, all the elements
contained in every one of the sets. The mathematical symbol
for intersection is ∩.
Inverse, Additive A number when added to a given number yields zero. See also
identity.
Inverse, Multiplicative A number when multiplied by a given number yields one. See
also identity
Isosceles Triangle A triangle that has at least two congruent sides.
Limit The target value that terms in a sequence of numbers are
getting closer to. This limit is not necessarily ever reached, the
numbers in the sequence eventually get arbitrarily close to the
limit.
Line Graph A diagram showing a system of connections or interrelations
between two or more things by using lines.
Line Segment A piece of a line with endpoints at both ends.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 39
WORDS MEANING
Line symmetry If a figure is divided by a line and both divisions are mirrors of
each other, the figure has line symmetry. The line that divides
the figure is the line of symmetry.
Linear Equation An equation containing linear expressions.
Linear Expression An expression of the form ax+b where x is variable and a and b
are constants, or in more variables, an expression of the form
ax+by+c, ax+by+cz+d.
Mean In statistics, the average obtained by dividing the sum of two or
more quantities by the number of these quantities.
Median In statistics, the quantity designating the middle value in a set
of numbers.
Mode In statistics, the value that occurs most frequently in a given
series of numbers.
Modulus A unit of measure. For example, when measuring days, a
modulus could be 24 for the number of hours in a day. 75
hours would be divided by 24 to give 3 remainder 3, or 3 days
and 3 hours. See also modular arithmetic.
Multimodal distribution A distribution with more than one mode. The histogram of a
multimodal distribution has more than one “bump”.
Multiples The product of multiplying a number by a whole number. For
example, multiples of 5 are 10, 15, 20 or any number that can
be evenly divided by 5.
Natural Numbers The set of the counting numbers, that is, 1, 2, 3, 4… In
graphing, numbers to the right of zero.
Negative Numbers Numbers less than zero. In graphing, numbers to the left of
zero. Negative numbers are represented by placing a minus sign
(-) in front of the number.
Obtuse Angle An angle whose measure is greater than 90 degrees.
Origin In the Cartesian coordinate plane, the origin is the point at
which the horizontal and vertical axes intersect, at zero (0,0).
Outcome space The outcome space is the set of all possible outcomes of a given
experiment.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 40
WORDS MEANING
Output The number or value that comes out from a process. For
example, in a function machine, a number goes in, something is
done to it, and the resulting number is the output.
Parallel Given distinct lines in the plane that are infinite in both
directions, the lines are parallel if they never meet. Two
distinct lines in the coordinate plane are parallel if and only if
they have the same slope.
Parallelogram A quadrilateral that contains two pairs of parallel sides
Pattern Characteristic(s) observed in one item that may be repeated in
similar or identical manners in other items.
Percent A ratio that compares a number to one hundred. The symbol
for percent is %.
Pi The designated name for the ratio of the circumference of a
circle to its diameter.
Pie Chart A chart made by plotting the numeric values of a set of
quantities as a set of adjacent circular wedges where the arc
lengths are proportional to the total amount. All wedges taken
together comprise an entire disk.
Pie Graph A diagram showing a system of connections or interrelations
between two or more things by using a circle divided into
segments that look like pieces of pie.
Polygon A closed plane figure formed by three or more line segments
that do not cross over each other.
Polyhedra Any solid figure with an outer surface composed of polygon
faces.
Polynominal An algebraic expression involving a sum of powers in one or
more variables that are multiplied by co-efficients. For example,
a polynomial in one variable with constant co-efficients is given
by anxn + an-1xn-1 +…+a2x2
+ a1x1 + a0.
Prime A natural number p greater than 1 is prime if and only if the
only positive integer factors of p are 1 and p. The first seven
primes are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17.
Probability The measure of how likely it is for an event to occur. The
probability of an event is always a number between zero and 1.
The meaning (interpretation) of probability is the subject of
theories of probability. However, any rule for assigning
probabilities to events has to satisfy the axioms of probability.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 41
WORDS MEANING
Proportion A relationship between two ratios in which the first ratio is
always equal to the second.
Protractor An instrument for laying down and measuring angles on paper,
used in drawing and plotting.
Pythagorean Theorem Used to find side lengths of right triangles, the Pythagorean
Theorem states that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the
squares of the two sides, or A2
+B2
=C2
, where c is the
hypotenuse.
Quadrant The four parts of a grid divided by the axes. Each of these
quadrants has a number designation. First quadrant – contains
all the points with positive x and positive y coordinates. Second
quadrant - contains all the points with negative x and positive y
coordinates. Fourth quadrant – contains all the points with
positive x and positive y coordinates.
Quadratic Function A function given by a polynomial of degree 2.
Quadrilateral A polygon that has four sides.
Quotient When performing division, the number of times one value can
be multiplied to reach the other value represents the quotient.
For example, when dividing 7 by 3, 3 can be multiplied twice,
making 6, and the remainder is 1, so the quotient is 2.
Range The range of a set of numbers is the largest value in the set
minus the smallest value in the set. Note that the range is a
single number, not many numbers.
Range of Function f The set of all the numbers f(x) for x in the domain of f.
Ratio A comparison expressed as a fraction. For example, there is a
ratio of threes boys to two girls in a class ( 3
2
, 3:2).
Rational Numbers Numbers that can be expressed as the quotient of two integers,
for example, 7
3
, 5
11 , 5
13
− , 7 =
7
1
.
Ray A straight line that begins at a point and continues outward in
one direction.
Reflection The reflection through a line in the plane or a plane in space is
the transformation that takes each point in the plane to its
mirror image with respect to the line or its mirror image with
respect to the plane in space. It produces a mirror image of a
geometric figure.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 42
WORDS MEANING
Real Numbers The union of the set of rational numbers and the set of
irrational numbers. Also called the continuum.
Regular Polygon A polygon whose side lengths are all the same and whose
interior angle measures are all the same.
Rhombus A parallelogram with four congruent sides.
Right Angle An angle of 90 degrees.
Right Triangle A triangle containing an angle of 90 degrees.
Rotate The turning of an object (or co-ordinate system) by an angle
about a fixed point.
Scientific Notation A shorthand way of writing very large or very small numbers. A
number expressed in scientific notation is expressed as a
decimal number between 1 and 10 multiplied by a power of 10
(for example, 7000 = 7x103 or 0.0000019 = 1.9x10-6
).
Sector A piece of an object. In the spinner, any of the numbered
segments is a “sector”.
Sequence An ordered set whose elements are usually determined based on
some function of the counting numbers.
Set A set is a collection of things, without regard to their order.
Significant Digits The number of digits to consider when using measuring
numbers. There are three rules in determining the number of
digits considered significant in a number:
- All non-zeros are significant.
- Any zeros between two non-zeros are significant.
- Only trailing zeros behind the decimal are considered
significant.
Similarity Two figures are said to be similar when all corresponding angles
are equal and all distances are increased (or decreased) in the
same ratio.
Sine Sin (q) is the y-coordinate of the point on the unit circle so that
the ray connecting the point with the origin makes an angle of
q with the positive x-axis. When q is an angle of a right
triangle, the sin (q) is the ratio of the opposite side with the
hypotenuse.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 43
WORDS MEANING
Square Root The square roots of n are all the numbers m so that 2 m = n.
The square roots of 16 are 4 and -4. The square roots of -16
are 4i and -4i.
Subset A subset of a given set is a collection of things that belong to
the original set. For example, A={a,b}, could include, a, b, a
and b, or the null set (neither).
Surface Area A measure of the number of square units needed to cover the
outside of a figure.
Symmetry A symmetry of a shape S in the plane or space is a rigid motion
T that takes S onto itself (T(S)=S). For example, reflection
through a diagonal and a rotation through a right angle about
the centre are both symmetries of the square.
System of Linear Equations Set of equations of the first degree (for example, x+y=7 and xy=1). A solution of a set of linear equations is a set of numbers
a, b, c,….. so that when the variables are replaced by the
numbers all the equations are satisfied. For example, in the
equations above, x = 4 and y = 3 is the solution.
Translate In a tessellation, to translate an object means repeating it by
sliding it over a certain distance in a certain direction.
Translation A rigid motion of the plane or space of the form X goes to X +
V for a fixed vector V.
Transversal In geometry, given two or more lines in the plane a transversal
is a line distinct from the original lines and intersects each of
the given liens in a single point.
Tessellation A tessellation is a repeated geometric design that covers a plane
without gaps or overlaps.
Theoretical Probability The chances of events happening as determined by calculating
results that would occur under ideal circumstances. For
example, the theoretical probability of rolling a 4 on a foursided die is ¼ or 25%, because there is one chance in four to
roll a 4, and under ideal circumstances one out of every four
rolls would be a 4. Contrast with experimental probability.
Trapezoid A quadrilateral with exactly one pair of parallel sides.
Union of Sets The union of two or more sets is the set of all the objects
contained by at least one of the sets. The symbol for union is
U.
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 44
WORDS MEANING
Variable A placeholder in algebraic expression, for example, in
3x + y = 23, x and y are variables.
Vector Quantity that has magnitude (length) and direction. It may be
represented as a directed line segment.
Velocity The rate of change of position overtime is velocity, calculated by
dividing distance by time.
Venn Diagram A diagram where sets are represented as simple geometric
figures, with overlapping and similarity of sets represented by
intersections and unions of the figures.
Volume A measure of the number of cubic units needed to fill the space
inside an object.
X-intercept The x-coordinate of the point where the line crosses the x-axis.
Y-intercept The y-coordinate of the point where the line crosses the y-axis.
Western Zone Office
2008/04/07
 CXC 05/G/SYLL 08 45